

===== PDF 175 / книга 161 =====
Chapter 10
Convolutional networks
Chapters 2–9 introduced the supervised learning pipeline for deep neural networks. How-
ever, these chapters only considered fully connected networks with a single path from
input to output. Chapters 10–13 introduce more specialized network components with
sparser connections, shared weights, and parallel processing paths. This chapter de-
scribes convolutional layers, which are mainly used for processing image data.
Images have three properties that suggest the need for specialized model architec-
ture. First, they are high-dimensional. A typical image for a classification task contains
224×224 RGB values (i.e., 150,528 input dimensions). Hidden layers in fully connected
networks are generally larger than the input size, so even for a shallow network, the
number of weights would exceed 150, 5282, or 22 billion. This poses obvious practical
problems in terms of the required training data, memory, and computation.
Second, nearby image pixels are statistically related. However, fully connected net-
works have no notion of “nearby” and treat the relationship between every input equally.
If the pixels of the training and test images were randomly permuted in the same way,
the network could still be trained with no practical difference. Third, the interpretation
of an image is stable under geometric transformations. An image of a tree is still an
image of a tree if we shift it leftwards by a few pixels. However, this shift changes every
input to the network. Hence, a fully connected model must learn the patterns of pixels
that signify a tree separately at every position, which is clearly ineﬀicient.
Convolutional layers process each local image region independently, using parameters
shared across the whole image. They use fewer parameters than fully connected layers,
exploit the spatial relationships between nearby pixels, and don’t have to re-learn the
interpretation of the pixels at every position. A network predominantly consisting of
convolutional layers is known as a convolutional neural network or CNN.
10.1 Invariance and equivariance
We argued above that some properties of images (e.g., tree texture) are stable under
transformations. In this section, we make this idea more mathematically precise. A


===== PDF 176 / книга 162 =====
162 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.1 Invariance and equivariance for translation. a–b) In image classi-
fication, the goal is to categorize both images as “mountain” regardless of the
horizontal shift that has occurred. In other words, we require the network pre-
diction to be invariant to translation. c,e) The goal of semantic segmentation is
to associate a label with each pixel. d,f) When the input image is translated, we
want the output (colored overlay) to translate in the same way. In other words,
we require the output to be equivariant with respect to translation. Panels c–f)
adapted from Bousselham et al. (2021).
function f[x] of an image x is invariant to a transformation t[x] if:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
f t[x] = f[x]. (10.1)
In other words, the output of the function f[x] is the same regardless of the transfor-
mation t[x]. Networks for image classification should be invariant to geometric trans-
formations of the image (figure 10.1a–b). The network f[x] should identify an image as
containing the same object, even if it has been translated, rotated, flipped, or warped.
A function f[x] of an image x is equivariant or covariant to a transformation t[x] if:
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
f t[x] = t f[x] . (10.2)
In other words, f[x] is equivariant to the transformation t[x] if its output changes in
the same way under the transformation as the input. Networks for per-pixel image
segmentation should be equivariant to transformations (figure 10.1c–f); if the image is
translated, rotated, or flipped, the network f[x] should return a segmentation that has
been transformed in the same way.


===== PDF 177 / книга 163 =====
10.2 Convolutional networks for 1D inputs 163
Figure 10.2 1D convolution with kernel size three. Each output zi is a weighted
sum of the nearest three inputs xi−1, xi, and xi+1, where the weights are ω =
[ω1, ω2, ω3]. a) Output z2 is computed as z2 = ω1x1 + ω2x2 + ω3x3. b) Output z3
is computed as z3 = ω1x2 + ω2x3 + ω3x4. c) At position z1, the kernel extends
beyond the first input x1. This can be handled by zero padding, in which we
assume values outside the input are zero. The final output is treated similarly.
d) Alternatively, we could only compute outputs where the kernel fits within the
input range (“valid” convolution); now, the output will be smaller than the input.
10.2 Convolutional networks for 1D inputs
Convolutional networks consist of a series of convolutional layers, each of which is equiv-
ariant to translation. They also typically include pooling mechanisms that induce partial
invariance to translation. For clarity of exposition, we first consider convolutional net-
works for 1D data, which are easier to visualize. In section 10.3, we progress to 2D
convolution, which can be applied to image data.
10.2.1 1D convolution operation
Convolutional layers are network layers based on the convolution operation. In 1D, a
convolution transforms an input vector x into an output vector z so that each output
zi is a weighted sum of nearby inputs. The same weights are used at every position and
are collectively called the convolution kernel or filter. The region over which inputs are
weighted and summed is termed the kernel size. For a kernel size of three, we have:
zi = ω1xi−1 + ω2xi + ω3xi+1, (10.3)
w at h io e n re is ω e = qu [ i ω va 1 r , i ω a 2 n , t ω w 3] i T th is re t s h p e ec k t er t n o el tr ( a fi n g s u la re tio 1 n 0 . .2) I . f 1 w N e o t t r i a c n e s t la h t a e t t t h h e e i c n o p n u v t ol x u , ti t o h n en op t e h r e - Problem 10.1
corresponding output z is translated in the same way.
1Strictly speaking, this is a cross-correlation and not a convolution, in which the weights would be
flipped relative to the input (so we would switch xi−1 with xi+1). Regardless, this (incorrect) definition
is the usual convention in machine learning.


===== PDF 178 / книга 164 =====
164 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.3 Stride, kernel size, and dilation. a) With a stride of two, we evaluate
the kernel at every other position, so the first output z1 is computed from a
weighted sum centered at x1, and b) the second output z2 is computed from a
weighted sum centered at x3 and so on. c) The kernel size can also be changed.
With a kernel size of five, we take a weighted sum of the nearest five inputs. d) In
dilated or atrous convolution, we intersperse zeros in the weight vector to allow
us to combine information over a large area using fewer weights.
10.2.2 Padding
Equation 10.3 shows that each output is computed by taking a weighted sum of the
previous, current, and subsequent positions in the input. This begs the question of how
to deal with the first output (where there is no previous input) and the final output
(where there is no subsequent input).
There are two common approaches. The first is to pad the edges of the inputs with
new values and proceed as usual. Zero padding assumes the input is zero outside its
valid range (figure 10.2c). Other possibilities include treating the input as circular or
reflecting it at the boundaries. The second approach is to discard the output positions
where the kernel exceeds the range of input positions. These valid convolutions have the
advantage of introducing no extra information at the edges of the input. However, they
have the disadvantage that the representation decreases in size.
10.2.3 Stride, kernel size, and dilation
In the example above, each output was a sum of the nearest three inputs. However,
this is just one of a larger family of convolution operations, the members of which are
distinguished by their stride, kernel size, and dilation rate. When we evaluate the output


===== PDF 179 / книга 165 =====
10.2 Convolutional networks for 1D inputs 165
at every position, we term this a stride of one. However, it is also possible to shift the
kernel by a stride greater than one. If we have a stride of two, we create roughly half
the number of outputs (figure 10.3a–b).
The kernel size can be increased to integrate over a larger area (figure 10.3c). How-
ever, it typically remains an odd number so that it can be centered around the current
position. Increasing the kernel size has the disadvantage of requiring more weights. This
leads to the idea of dilated or atrous convolutions, in which the kernel values are inter-
spersed with zeros. For example, we can turn a kernel of size five into a dilated kernel of
size three by setting the second and fourth elements to zero. We still integrate informa-
tion from a larger input region but only require three weights to do this (figure 10.3d). Problems 10.2–10.4
The number of zeros we intersperse between the weights determines the dilation rate.
10.2.4 Convolutional layers
A convolutional layer computes its output by convolving the input, adding a bias β, and
passing each result through an activation function a[•]. With kernel size three, stride
one, and dilation rate one, the ith hidden unit hi would be computed as:
hi = a [2β + ω1xi−1 + ω2xi3+ ω3xi+1]
X3
= a 4β + ωjxi+j−2 5 , (10.4)
j=1
where the bias β and kernel weights ω1, ω2, ω3 are trainable parameters, and (with zero
padding) we treat the input x as zero when it is out of the valid range. This is a special
case of a fully connected layer that computes the ith hidden unit as:
2 3
XD
hi = a 4βi + ωijxj 5 . (10.5)
j=1
If there are D inputs x• and D hidden units h•, this fully connected layer would have D2
weights ω•• and D biases β•. The convolutional layer only uses three weights and one
bias. A fully connected layer can reproduce this exactly if most weights are set to zero
and others are constrained to be identical (figure 10.4). Problem 10.5
10.2.5 Channels
If we only apply a single convolution, information will inevitably be lost; we are averaging
nearby inputs, and the ReLU activation function clips results that are less than zero.
Hence, it is usual to compute several convolutions in parallel. Each convolution produces
a new set of hidden variables, termed a feature map or channel.


===== PDF 180 / книга 166 =====
166 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.4 Fully connected vs. convolutional layers. a) A fully connected layer
has a weight connecting each input x to each hidden unit h (colored arrows)
and a bias for each hidden unit (not shown). b) Hence, the associated weight
matrix Ω contains 36 weights relating the six inputs to the six hidden units. c) A
convolutional layer with kernel size three computes each hidden unit as the same
weighted sum of the three neighboring inputs (arrows) plus a bias (not shown).
d) The weight matrix is a special case of the fully connected matrix where many
weights are zero and others are repeated (same colors indicate same value, white
indicates zero weight). e) A convolutional layer with kernel size three and stride
two computes a weighted sum at every other position. f) This is also a special
case of a fully connected network with a different sparse weight structure.
Figure 10.5 Channels. Typically, multiple convolutions are applied to the input x
and stored in channels. a) A convolution is applied to create hidden units h1
to h6, which form the first channel. b) A second convolution operation is applied
to create hidden units h7 to h12, which form the second channel. The channels
are stored in a 2D array H1 that contains all the hidden units in the first hidden
layer. c) If we add a further convolutional layer, there are now two channels at
each input position. Here, the 1D convolution defines a weighted sum over both
input channels at the three closest positions to create each new output channel.


===== PDF 181 / книга 167 =====
10.2 Convolutional networks for 1D inputs 167
Figure 10.5a–b illustrates this with two convolution kernels of size three and with
zero padding. The first kernel computes a weighted sum of the nearest three pixels, adds
a bias, and passes the results through the activation function to produce hidden units h1
to h6. These comprise the first channel. The second kernel computes a different weighted
sum of the nearest three pixels, adds a different bias, and passes the results through the
activation function to create hidden units h7 to h12. These comprise the second channel.
In general, the input and the hidden layers all have multiple channels (figure 10.5c).
c u I n f h s e i t a x n h n t g e n la e a in y l w c e a o r e r , m e ig t i h h c n e o t g n m m la w p a y u e t e t r r n e ix d e h e a Ω d a s s Ω C ∈ a i R ∈ w c C h e R i a i × g C n K h i n × t e e C a l d s o n × a d s n K u o d m n w k e e o e i b r v g n i e h a e r t s l s . a s l a i H l z n e e C d n K i c β e c , , h ∈ t a i h f n R e t n C h h e o i e l d s r b d e a i e a a n n s r d e e u s K n . C i o ts k c e i h n r a n e n e a n l c e p h ls o o s i u i n t t i p o th n u e s t Pr 1 N o D b o l t e c e m o b n s o v o 1 o k 0 lu . 1 6 t 0 – io . 1 1 n 0.8
10.2.6 Convolutional networks and receptive fields
Chapter 4 described deep networks, which consisted of a sequence of fully connected
layers. Similarly, convolutional networks comprise a sequence of convolutional layers.
The receptive field of a hidden unit in the network is the region of the original input that
feeds into it. Consider a convolutional network where each convolutional layer has kernel
size three. The hidden units in the first layer take a weighted sum of the three closest
inputs, so have receptive fields of size three. The units in the second layer take a weighted
sum of the three closest positions in the first layer, which are themselves weighted sums
of three inputs. Hence, the hidden units in the second layer have a receptive field of size
five. In this way, the receptive field of units in successive layers increases, and information
from across the input is gradually integrated (figure 10.6). Problems 10.9–10.11
10.2.7 Example: MNIST-1D
We now apply a convolutional network to the MNIST-1D data (see figure 8.1). The
input x is a 40D vector, and the output f is a 10D vector that is passed through a
softmax layer to produce class probabilities. We use a network with three hidden layers
(figure 10.7). The fifteen channels of the first hidden layer H1 are each computed using
a kernel size of three and a stride of two with “valid” padding, giving nineteen spatial
positions. The second hidden layer H2 is also computed using a kernel size of three, a
stride of two, and “valid” padding. The third hidden layer is computed similarly. At this
stage, the representation has four spatial positions and fifteen channels. These values
are reshaped into a vector of size sixty, which is mapped by a fully connected layer to
the ten output activations.
This network was trained for 100,000 steps using SGD without momentum, a learning
rate of 0.01, and a batch size of 100 on a dataset of 4,000 examples. We compare this to
a fully connected network with the same number of layers and hidden units (i.e., three Problem 10.12
hidden layers with 285, 135, and 60 hidden units, respectively). The convolutional net-
work has 2,050 parameters, and the fully connected network has 150,185 parameters. By
the logic of figure 10.4, the convolutional network is a special case of the fully connected


===== PDF 182 / книга 168 =====
168 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.6 Receptive fields for network with kernel width of three. a) An input
with eleven dimensions feeds into a hidden layer with three channels and convo-
lution kernel of size three. The pre-activations of the three highlighted hidden
units in the first hidden layer H1 are different weighted sums of the nearest three
inputs, so the receptive field in H1 has size three. b) The pre-activations of the
four highlighted hidden units in layer H2 each take a weighted sum of the three
channels in layer H1 at each of the three nearest positions. Each hidden unit in
layer H1 weights the nearest three input positions. Hence, hidden units in H2
have a receptive field size of five. c) The hidden units in the third layer (kernel
size three, stride two) increases the receptive field size to seven. d) By the time
we add a fourth layer, the receptive field of the hidden units at position three
have a receptive field that covers the entire input.


===== PDF 183 / книга 169 =====
10.2 Convolutional networks for 1D inputs 169
Figure 10.7 Convolutional network for classifying MNIST-1D data (see figure 8.1).
The MNIST-1D input has dimension Di = 40. The first convolutional layer has
fifteen channels, kernel size three, stride two, and only retains “valid” positions
to make a representation with nineteen positions and fifteen channels. The fol-
lowing two convolutional layers have the same settings, gradually reducing the
representation size. Finally, a fully connected layer takes all sixty hidden units
from the third hidden layer. It outputs ten activations that are subsequently
passed through a softmax layer to produce the ten class probabilities.
Figure 10.8 MNIST-1D results. a) The convolutional network from figure 10.7
eventually fits the training data perfectly and has ∼17% test error. b) A fully
connected network with the same number of hidden layers and the number of
hidden units in each learns the training data faster but fails to generalize well with
∼40% test error. The latter model can reproduce the convolutional model but
fails to do so. The convolutional structure restricts the possible mappings to those
that process every position similarly, and this restriction improves performance.


===== PDF 184 / книга 170 =====
170 10 Convolutional networks
one. The latter has enough flexibility to replicate the former exactly. Figure 10.8 shows
N C o o te n b v o o o lu k ti 1 o 0 n .2 both models fit the training data perfectly. However, the test error for the convolutional
for MNIST-1D network is much less than for the fully connected network.
This discrepancy is probably not due to the difference in the number of parameters;
we know overparameterization usually improves performance (section 8.4.1). The likely
explanation is that the convolutional architecture has a superior inductive bias (i.e.,
interpolates between the training data better) because we have embodied some prior
knowledge in the architecture; we have forced the network to process each position in
the input in the same way. We know that the data were created by starting with a
template that is (among other operations) randomly translated, so this is sensible.
The fully connected network has to learn what each digit template looks like at every
position. In contrast, the convolutional network shares information across positions and
hence learns to identify each category more accurately. Another way of thinking about
this is that when we train the convolutional network, we search through a smaller family
of input/output mappings, all of which are plausible. Alternatively, the convolutional
structure can be considered a regularizer that applies an infinite penalty to most of the
solutions that a fully connected network can describe.
10.3 Convolutional networks for 2D inputs
The previous section described convolutional networks for processing 1D data. Such
networks can be applied to financial time series, audio, and text. However, convolutional
networks are more usually applied to 2D image data. The convolutional kernel is now
a 2D object. A 3×3 kernel Ω ∈ R3×3 applied to a 2D input comprising of elements xij
computes a single layer of hidden units hij as:
" #
X3 X3
hij = a β + ωmnxi+m−2,j+n−2 , (10.6)
m=1 n=1
where ωmn are the entries of the convolutional kernel. This is simply a weighted sum
over a square 3×3 input region. The kernel is translated both horizontally and vertically
Problem 10.13 across the 2D input (figure 10.9) to create an output at each position.
Often the input is an RGB image, which is treated as a 2D signal with three channels
(figure 10.10). Here, a 3×3 kernel would have 3×3×3 weights and be applied to the
2 N D ot c e o b n o v o o k lu 1 t 0 io .3 n three input channels at each of the 3×3 positions to create a 2D output that is the same
height and width as the input image (assuming zero padding). To generate multiple
Problem 10.14 output channels, we repeat this process with different kernel weights and append the
results to form a 3D tensor. If the kernel is size K × K, and there are Ci input channels,
App T e e n n d so ix rs B.3 e th ac a h t t o o ut c p o u m t p c u h t a e n C ne o l o is ut a p w ut ei c g h h a te n d ne s l u s m , w o e f n C e i e × d K Ci × × K Co qu × a K nti × tie K s p w lu e s ig o h n t e s b a i n a d s. C I o t f b o i l a l s o e w s s .


===== PDF 185 / книга 171 =====
10.4 Downsampling and upsampling 171
t F h ig e u 3 r × e 3 10 n . e 9 a 2 re D st co in n p v u o t lu s, ti a o d n d a s l l a ay b e i r a . s, E a a n c d h p ou as t s p e u s t t h h i e j r c e o s m ul p t u t t h e r s o a ug w h ei a g n ht a e c d ti s v u a m tio o n f
function. a) Here, the output h23 (shaded output) is a weighted sum of the nine
positions from x12 to x34 (shaded inputs). b) Different outputs are computed by
translating the kernel across the image grid in two dimensions. c–d) With zero
padding, positions beyond the image’s edge are considered to be zero.
10.4 Downsampling and upsampling
The network in figure 10.7 increased receptive field size by scaling down the representa-
tion at each layer using stride two convolutions. We now consider methods for scaling
down or downsampling 2D input representations. We also describe methods for scaling
them back up (upsampling), which is useful when the output is also an image. Finally,
we consider methods to change the number of channels between layers. This is helpful
when recombining representations from two branches of a network (chapter 11).
10.4.1 Downsampling
There are three main approaches to scaling down a 2D representation. Here, we consider
the most common case of scaling down both dimensions by a factor of two. First, we


===== PDF 186 / книга 172 =====
172 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.10 2D convolution applied to an image. The image is treated as a 2D
input with three channels corresponding to the red, green, and blue components.
With a 3×3 kernel, each pre-activation in the first hidden layer is computed by
pointwise multiplying the 3×3×3 kernel weights with the 3×3 RGB image patch
centered at the same position, summing, and adding the bias. To calculate all
the pre-activations in the hidden layer, we “slide” the kernel over the image in
both horizontal and vertical directions. The output is a 2D layer of hidden units.
To create multiple output channels, we would repeat this process with multiple
kernels, resulting in a 3D tensor of hidden units at hidden layer H1.
can sample every other position. When we use a stride of two, we effectively apply this
Problem 10.15 method simultaneously with the convolution operation (figure 10.11a).
Second, max pooling retains the maximum of the 2×2 input values (figure 10.11b).
This induces some invariance to translation; if the input is shifted by one pixel, many
of these maximum values remain the same. Finally, mean pooling or average pooling
averages the inputs. For all approaches, we apply downsampling separately to each
channel, so the output has half the width and height but the same number of channels.
10.4.2 Upsampling
The simplest way to scale up a network layer to double the resolution is to duplicate
all the channels at each spatial position four times (figure 10.12a). A second method
is max unpooling; this is used where we have previously used a max pooling operation
for downsampling, and we distribute the values to the positions they originated from
(figure 10.12b). A third approach uses bilinear interpolation to fill in the missing values
between the points where we have samples. (figure 10.12c).
A fourth approach is roughly analogous to downsampling using a stride of two. In
D N o o w te n b s o a o m k p 1 li 0 n .4 g that method, there were half as many outputs as inputs, and for kernel size three, each
& upsampling output was a weighted sum of the three closest inputs (figure 10.13a). In transposed
convolution, this picture is reversed (figure 10.13c). There are twice as many outputs


===== PDF 187 / книга 173 =====
10.4 Downsampling and upsampling 173
Figure 10.11 Methods for scaling down representation size (downsampling). a)
Sub-sampling. The original 4×4 representation (left) is reduced to size 2×2 (right)
by retaining every other input. Colors on the left indicate which inputs contribute
to the outputs on the right. This is effectively what happens with a kernel of stride
two, except that the intermediate values are never computed. b) Max pooling.
Each output comprises the maximum value of the corresponding 2×2 block. c)
Mean pooling. Each output is the mean of the values in the 2×2 block.
Figure 10.12 Methods for scaling up representation size (upsampling). a) The
simplest way to double the size of a 2D layer is to duplicate each input four
times. b) In networks where we have previously used a max pooling operation
(figure 10.11b), we can redistribute the values to the same positions they originally
came from (i.e., where the maxima were). This is known as max unpooling. c) A
third option is bilinear interpolation between the input values.
Figure 10.13 Transposed convolution in 1D. a) Downsampling with kernel size
three, stride two, and zero padding. Each output is a weighted sum of three
inputs (arrows indicate weights). b) This can be expressed by a weight matrix
(same color indicates shared weight). c) In transposed convolution, each input
contributes three values to the output layer, which has twice as many outputs as
inputs. d) The associated weight matrix is the transpose of that in panel (b).


===== PDF 188 / книга 174 =====
174 10 Convolutional networks
as inputs, and each input contributes to three of the outputs. When we consider the
associated weight matrix of this upsampling mechanism (figure 10.13d), we see that it is
the transpose of the matrix for the downsampling mechanism (figure 10.13b).
10.4.3 Changing the number of channels
Sometimes we want to change the number of channels between one hidden layer and the
next without further spatial pooling. This is usually so we can combine the representation
with another parallel computation (see chapter 11). To accomplish this, we apply a
convolution with kernel size one. Each element of the output layer is computed by
taking a weighted sum of all the channels at the same position (figure 10.14). We can
repeat this multiple times with different weights to generate as many output channels as
we need. The associated convolution weights have size 1 × 1 × Ci × Co. Hence, this is
known as 1×1 convolution. Combined with a bias and activation function, it is equivalent
to running the same fully connected network on the channels at every position.
10.5 Applications
We conclude by describing three computer vision applications. We describe convolu-
tional networks for image classification where the goal is to assign the image to one of a
predetermined set of categories. Then we consider object detection, where the goal is to
identify multiple objects in an image and find the bounding box around each. Finally,
we describe an early system for semantic segmentation where the goal is to assign a label
to each pixel according to which object is present.
10.5.1 Image classification
Much of the pioneering work on deep learning in computer vision focused on image
classification using the ImageNet dataset (figure 10.15). This contains 1,281,167 training
images, 50,000 validation images, and 100,000 test images, and every image is labeled as
belonging to one of 1000 possible categories.
Most methods reshape the input images to a standard size; in a typical system,
the input x to the network is a 224×224 RGB image, and the output is a probability
distribution over the 1000 classes. The task is challenging; there are a large number
of classes, and they exhibit considerable variation (figure 10.15). In 2011, before deep
networks were applied, the state-of-the-art method classified the test images with ∼ 25%
errors for the correct class being in the top five suggestions. Five years later, the best
deep learning models eclipsed human performance.
In 2012, AlexNet was the first convolutional network to perform well on this task.
It consists of eight hidden layers with ReLU activation functions, of which the first
five are convolutional and the rest fully connected (figure 10.16). The network starts by


===== PDF 189 / книга 175 =====
10.5 Applications 175
Figure 10.14 1×1 convolution. To change the number of channels without spatial
pooling, we apply a 1×1 kernel. Each output channel is computed by taking
a weighted sum of all of the channels at the same position, adding a bias, and
passing through an activation function. Multiple output channels are created by
repeating this operation with different weights and biases.
Figure 10.15 Example ImageNet classification images. The model aims to assign
an input image to one of 1000 classes. This task is challenging because the
images vary widely along different attributes (columns). These include rigidity
(monkey < canoe), number of instances in image (lizard < strawberry), clutter
(compass<steel drum), size (candle<spiderweb), texture (screwdriver<leopard),
distinctiveness of color (mug < red wine), and distinctiveness of shape (headland
< bell). Adapted from Russakovsky et al. (2015).


===== PDF 190 / книга 176 =====
176 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.16 AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012). The network maps a 224 × 224
color image to a 1000-dimensional vec-
tor representing class probabilities. The
network first convolves with 11×11 ker-
nels and stride 4 to create 96 channels.
It decreases the resolution again using a
max pool operation and applies a 5×5
convolutional layer. Another max pool-
ing layer follows, and three 3×3 convo-
lutional layers are applied. After a fi-
nal max pooling operation, the result
is vectorized and passed through three
fully connected (FC) layers and finally
the softmax layer.
downsampling the input using an 11×11 kernel with a stride of four to create 96 channels.
It then downsamples again using a max pooling layer before applying a 5×5 kernel to
create 256 channels. There are three more convolutional layers with kernel size 3×3,
Problems 10.16–10.17 eventually resulting in a 13×13 representation with 256 channels. This is resized into
a single vector of length 43, 264 and then passed through three fully connected layers
containing 4096, 4096, and 1000 hidden units, respectively. The last layer is passed
through the softmax function to output a probability distribution over the 1000 classes.
The complete network contains ∼60 million parameters. Most of these are in the fully
connected layers and the end of the network.
The dataset size was augmented by a factor of 2048 using (i) spatial transformations
N C o o te n b v o o o lu k ti 1 o 0 n .5 and (ii) modifications of the input intensities. At test time, five different cropped and
for MNIST mirrored versions of the image were run through the network, and their predictions
averaged. The system was learned using SGD with a momentum coeﬀicient of 0.9 and a
batch size of 128. Dropout was applied in the fully connected layers, and an L2 (weight
decay) regularizer was used. This system achieved a 16.4% top-5 error rate and a 38.1%
top-1 error rate. At the time, this was an enormous leap forward in performance at a task
considered far beyond the capabilities of contemporary methods. This result revealed
the potential of deep learning and kick-started the modern era of AI research.
The VGG network was also targeted at classification in the ImageNet task and
achieved a considerably better performance of 6.8% top-5 error rate and a 23.7% top-1
error rate. This network is similarly composed of a series of interspersed convolutional
and max pooling layers, where the spatial size of the representation gradually decreases,
but the number of channels increase. These are followed by three fully connected layers
(figure 10.17). The VGG network was also trained using data augmentation, weight
decay, and dropout.
Although there were various minor differences in the training regime, the most impor-
tant change between AlexNet and VGG was the depth of the network. The latter used
Problem 10.18 19 hidden layers and 144 million parameters. The networks in figures 10.16 and 10.17
are depicted at the same scale for comparison. There was a general trend for several
years for performance on this task to improve as the depth of the networks increased,
and this is evidence that depth is important in neural networks.


===== PDF 191 / книга 177 =====
10.5 Applications 177
Figure 10.17 VGG network (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) depicted at the same
scale as AlexNet (see figure 10.16). This network consists of a series of convolu-
tional layers and max pooling operations, in which the spatial scale of the rep-
resentation gradually decreases, but the number of channels gradually increases.
The hidden layer after the last convolutional operation is resized to a 1D vector
and three fully connected layers follow. The network outputs 1000 activations
corresponding to the class labels that are passed through a softmax function to
create class probabilities.
10.5.2 Object detection
In object detection, the goal is to identify and localize multiple objects within the image.
An early method based on convolutional networks was You Only Look Once, or YOLO
for short. The input to the YOLO network is a 448×448 RGB image. This is passed
through 24 convolutional layers that gradually decrease the representation size using
max pooling operations while concurrently increasing the number of channels, similarly
to the VGG network. The final convolutional layer is of size 7×7 and has 1024 channels.
This is reshaped to a vector, and a fully connected layer maps it to 4096 values. One
further fully connected layer maps this representation to the output.
The output values encode which class is present at each of a 7×7 grid of locations
(figure 10.18a–b). For each location, the output values also encode a fixed number of
bounding boxes. Five parameters define each box: the x- and y-positions of the center,
the height and width of the box, and the confidence of the prediction (figure 10.18c).
The confidence estimates the overlap between the predicted and ground truth bound-
ing boxes. The system is trained using momentum, weight decay, dropout, and data
augmentation. Transfer learning is employed; the network is initially trained on the
ImageNet classification task and is then fine-tuned for object detection.
After the network is run, a heuristic process is used to remove rectangles with low
confidence and to suppress predicted bounding boxes that correspond to the same object
so only the most confident one is retained.


===== PDF 192 / книга 178 =====
178 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.18 YOLO object detection. a) The input image is reshaped to 448×448
and divided into a regular 7×7 grid. b) The system predicts the most likely class
at each grid cell. c) It also predicts two bounding boxes per cell, and a confidence
value (represented by thickness of line). d) During inference, the most likely
bounding boxes are retained, and boxes with lower confidence values that belong
to the same object are suppressed. Adapted from Redmon et al. (2016).
10.5.3 Semantic segmentation
The goal of semantic segmentation is to assign a label to each pixel according to the object
that it belongs to or no label if that pixel does not correspond to anything in the training
database. An early network for semantic segmentation is depicted in figure 10.19. The
input is a 224×224 RGB image, and the output is a 224×224×21 array that contains
the probability of each of 21 possible classes at each position.
The first part of the network is a smaller version of VGG (figure 10.17) that contains
thirteen rather than fifteen convolutional layers and downsizes the representation to size
14×14. There is then one more max pooling operation, followed by two fully connected
layers that map to two 1D representations of size 4096. These layers do not represent
spatial position but instead, combine information from across the whole image.
Here, the architecture diverges from VGG. Another fully connected layer reconsti-
tutes the representation into 7×7 spatial positions and 512 channels. This is followed


===== PDF 193 / книга 179 =====
10.6 Summary 179
Figure 10.19 Semantic segmentation network of Noh et al. (2015). The input is a
224×224 image, which is passed through a version of the VGG network and even-
tually transformed into a representation of size 4096 using a fully connected layer.
This contains information about the entire image. This is then reformed into a
representation of size 7×7 using another fully connected layer, and the image is
upsampled and deconvolved (transposed convolutions without upsampling) in a
mirror image of the VGG network. The output is a 224×224×21 representation
that gives the output probabilities for the 21 classes at each position.
by a series of max unpooling layers (see figure 10.12b) and deconvolution layers. These
are transposed convolutions (see figure 10.13) but in 2D and without the upsampling.
Finally, there is a 1×1 convolution to create 21 channels representing the possible classes
and a softmax operation at each spatial position to map the activations to class proba-
bilities. The downsampling side of the network is sometimes referred to as an encoder,
and the upsampling side as a decoder, so networks of this type are sometimes called
encoder-decoder networks or hourglass networks due to their shape.
The final segmentation is generated using a heuristic method that greedily searches
for the class that is most represented and infers its region, taking into account the
probabilities but also encouraging connectedness. Then the next most-represented class
is added where it dominates at the remaining unlabeled pixels. This continues until there
is insuﬀicient evidence to add more (figure 10.20).
10.6 Summary
In convolutional layers, each hidden unit is computed by taking a weighted sum of the
nearby inputs, adding a bias, and applying an activation function. The weights and the
bias are the same at every spatial position, so there are far fewer parameters than in a
fully connected network, and the parameters don’t increase with the input image size.
To ensure that information is not lost, this operation is repeated with different weights


===== PDF 194 / книга 180 =====
180 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.20 Semantic segmentation results. The final result is created from the
21 probability maps by greedily selecting the best class and using a heuristic
method to find a sensible binary map based on the probabilities and their spatial
proximity. If there is enough evidence, subsequent classes are added, and their
segmentation maps are combined. Adapted from Noh et al. (2015).
and biases to create multiple channels at each spatial position.
Typical convolutional networks consist of convolutional layers interspersed with layers
that downsample by a factor of two. As the network progresses, the spatial dimensions
usually decrease by factors of two, and the number of channels increases by factors of
two. At the end of the network, there are typically one or more fully connected layers
that integrate information from across the entire input and create the desired output. If
the output is an image, a mirrored “decoder” upsamples back to the original size.
The translational equivariance of convolutional layers imposes a useful inductive bias
that increases performance for image-based tasks relative to fully connected networks.
We described image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation networks.
Image classification performance was shown to improve as the network became deeper.
However, subsequent experiments showed that increasing the network depth indefinitely
doesn’t continue to help; after a certain depth, the system becomes diﬀicult to train.
This is the motivation for residual connections, which are the topic of the next chapter.
Notes
Dumoulin & Visin (2016) present an overview of the mathematics of convolutions that expands
on the brief treatment in this chapter.
Convolutional networks: Early convolutional networks were developed by Fukushima &
Miyake (1982), LeCun et al. (1989a), and LeCun et al. (1989b). Initial applications included


===== PDF 195 / книга 181 =====
Notes 181
handwriting recognition (LeCun et al., 1989a; Martin, 1993), face recognition (Lawrence et al.,
1997), phoneme recognition (Waibel et al., 1989), spoken word recognition (Bottou et al., 1990),
and signature verification (Bromley et al., 1993). However, convolutional networks were popu-
larized by LeCun et al. (1998), who built a system called LeNet for classifying 28×28 grayscale
images of handwritten digits. This is immediately recognizable as a precursor of modern net-
works; it uses a series of convolutional layers, followed by fully connected layers, sigmoid activa-
tions rather than ReLUs, and average pooling rather than max pooling. AlexNet (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) is widely considered the starting point for modern deep convolutional networks.
ImageNet Challenge: Deng et al. (2009) collated the ImageNet database and the associated
classification challenge drove progress in deep learning for several years after AlexNet. Notable
subsequent winners of this challenge include the network-in-network architecture (Lin et al.,
2014), which alternated convolutions with fully connected layers that operated independently
on all of the channels at each position (i.e., 1×1 convolutions). Zeiler & Fergus (2014) and
Simonyan & Zisserman (2014) trained larger and deeper architectures that were fundamentally
similar to AlexNet. Szegedy et al. (2017) developed an architecture called GoogLeNet, which
introduced inception blocks. These use several parallel paths with different filter sizes, which
are then recombined. This effectively allowed the system to learn the filter size.
The trend was for performance to improve with increasing depth. However, it ultimately became
diﬀicult to train deeper networks without modifications; these include residual connections
and normalization layers, both of which are described in the next chapter. Progress in the
ImageNet challenges is summarized in Russakovsky et al. (2015). A more general survey of
image classification using convolutional networks can be found in Rawat & Wang (2017). The
improvement of image classification networks over time is visualized in figure 10.21.
Types of convolutional layers: Atrous or dilated convolutions were introduced by Chen
et al. (2018c) and Yu & Koltun (2015). Transposed convolutions were introduced by Long et al.
(2015). Odena et al. (2016) pointed out that they can lead to checkerboard artifacts and should
be used with caution. Lin et al. (2014) is an early example of convolution with 1×1 filters.
Many variants of the standard convolutional layer aim to reduce the number of parameters.
These include depthwise or channel-separate convolution (Howard et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2018),
in which a different filter convolves each channel separately to create a new set of channels. For
a kernel size of K × K with C input channels and C output channels, this requires K × K × C
parameters rather than the K × K × C × C parameters in a regular convolutional layer. A
related approach is grouped convolutions (Xie et al., 2017), where each convolution kernel is
only applied to a subset of the channels with a commensurate reduction in the parameters. In
fact, grouped convolutions were used in AlexNet for computational reasons; the whole network
could not run on a single GPU, so some channels were processed on one GPU and some on
another, with limited interaction points. Separable convolutions treat each kernel as an outer
product of 1D vectors; they use C + K + K parameters for each of the C channels. Partial
convolutions (Liu et al., 2018a) are used when inpainting missing pixels and account for the
partial masking of the input. Gated convolutions learn the mask from the previous layer (Yu
et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2019b). Hu et al. (2018b) propose squeeze-and-excitation networks
which re-weight the channels using information pooled across all spatial positions.
Downsampling and upsampling: Average pooling dates back to at least LeCun et al. (1989a)
and max pooling to Zhou & Chellappa (1988). Scherer et al. (2010) compared these methods
and concluded that max pooling was superior. The max unpooling method was introduced by
Zeiler et al. (2011) and Zeiler & Fergus (2014). Max pooling can be thought of as applying


===== PDF 196 / книга 182 =====
182 10 Convolutional networks
Figure 10.21 ImageNet performance. Each circle represents a different published
model. Blue circles represent models that were state-of-the-art. Models dis-
cussed in this book are also highlighted. The AlexNet and VGG networks were
remarkable for their time but are now far from state of the art. ResNet-200 and
DenseNet are discussed in chapter 11. ImageGPT, ViT, SWIN, and DaViT are
discussed in chapter 12. Adapted from https://paperswithcode.com/sota/image-
classification-on-imagenet.
A V p e p c e t n o d r i n x o B rm .3 s .2 a ( a S n re p L r n i ∞ n o g t e n w n o b i r d m e e r l g y to e u t t s a h e l e d ., . h 2 i Z 0 d 1 h d 5 a e ; n n S g u a n ( in 2 it a 0 s t 1 h 9 th ) e a t i t n a t a l r . r o , e d 2 u t 0 o c 1 e 3 b d ) e , m a p l a o t x h o - l o b e u d lu g . r h - T p t o h h o i e s l s i e n le g r d , eq i t n u o ir w a e p h p m ic ly o h r in e a g c l o o o m w th - p e p u r a t s L a s t k i fi o n l n t o e r a r m n i d s s
applied before downsampling to prevent aliasing, and showed that this improves generalization
over translation of the inputs and protects against adversarial attacks (see section 20.4.6).
Shi et al. (2016) introduced PixelShuffle, which used convolutional filters with a stride of 1/s
to scale up 1D signals by a factor of s. Only the weights that lie exactly on positions are
used to create the outputs, and the ones that fall between positions are discarded. This can
be implemented by multiplying the number of channels in the kernel by a factor of s, where
the sth output position is computed from just the sth subset of channels. This can be trivially
extended to 2D convolution, which requires s2 channels.
Convolution in 1D and 3D: Convolutional networks are usually applied to images but have
also been applied to 1D data in applications that include speech recognition (Abdel-Hamid
et al., 2012), sentence classification (Zhang et al., 2015; Conneau et al., 2017), electrocardiogram
classification (Kiranyaz et al., 2015), and bearing fault diagnosis (Eren et al., 2019). A survey
of 1D convolutional networks can be found in Kiranyaz et al. (2021). Convolutional networks
have also been applied to 3D data, including video (Ji et al., 2012; Saha et al., 2016; Tran et al.,
2015) and volumetric measurements (Wu et al., 2015b; Maturana & Scherer, 2015).
Invariance and equivariance: Part of the motivation for convolutional layers is that they
are approximately equivariant with respect to translation, and part of the motivation for max


===== PDF 197 / книга 183 =====
Notes 183
pooling is to induce invariance to small translations. Zhang (2019) considers the degree to
which convolutional networks really have these properties and proposes the max-blur-pooling
modification that demonstrably improves them. There is considerable interest in making net-
works equivariant or invariant to other types of transformations, such as reflections, rotations,
and scaling. Sifre & Mallat (2013) constructed a system based on wavelets that induced both
translational and rotational invariance in image patches and applied this to texture classifica-
tion. Kanazawa et al. (2014) developed locally scale-invariant convolutional neural networks.
Cohen & Welling (2016) exploited group theory to construct group CNNs, which are equivariant
to larger families of transformations, including reflections and rotations. Esteves et al. (2018)
introduced polar transformer networks, which are invariant to translations and equivariant to
rotation and scale. Worrall et al. (2017) developed harmonic networks, the first example of a
group CNN that was equivariant to continuous rotations.
Initialization and regularization: Convolutional networks are typically initialized using
Xavier initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) or He initialization (He et al., 2015), as described
in section 7.5. However, the ConvolutionOrthogonal initializer (Xiao et al., 2018a) is specialized
for convolutional networks (Xiao et al., 2018a). Networks of up to 10,000 layers can be trained Problem 10.19
using this initialization without the need for residual connections.
Dropout is effective for fully connected networks but less so for convolutional layers (Park &
Kwak, 2016). This may be because neighboring image pixels are highly correlated, so if a hidden
unit drops out, the same information is passed on via adjacent positions. This is the motivation
for spatial dropout and cutout. In spatial dropout (Tompson et al., 2015), entire feature maps
are discarded instead of individual pixels. This circumvents the problem of neighboring pixels
carrying the same information. Similarly, DeVries & Taylor (2017b) propose cutout, in which a
square patch of each input image is masked at training time. Wu & Gu (2015) modified max
pooling for dropout layers using a method that involves sampling from a probability distribution
over the constituent elements rather than always taking the maximum.
Adaptive Kernels: The inception block (Szegedy et al., 2017) applies convolutional filters of
different sizes in parallel and, as such, provides a crude mechanism by which the network can
learn the appropriate filter size. Other work has investigated learning the scale of convolutions
as part of the training process (e.g., Pintea et al., 2021; Romero et al., 2021) or the stride of
downsampling layers (Riad et al., 2022).
In some systems, the kernel size is changed adaptively based on the data. This is sometimes in
the context of guided convolution, where one input is used to help guide the computation from
another input. For example, an RGB image might be used to help upsample a low-resolution
depth map. Jia et al. (2016) directly predicted the filter weights themselves using a different
network branch. Xiong et al. (2020b) change the kernel size adaptively. Su et al. (2019a)
moderate weights of fixed kernels by a function learned from another modality. Dai et al.
(2017) learn offsets of weights so that they do not have to be applied in a regular grid.
Object detection and semantic segmentation: Object detection methods can be divided
into proposal-based and proposal-free schemes. In the former case, processing occurs in two
stages. A convolutional network ingests the whole image and proposes regions that might
contain objects. These proposal regions are then resized, and a second network analyzes them
to establish whether there is an object there and what it is. An early example of this approach
was R-CNN (Girshick et al., 2014). This was subsequently extended to allow end-to-end training
(Girshick, 2015) and to reduce the cost of the region proposals (Ren et al., 2015). Subsequent
work on feature pyramid networks improved both performance and speed by combining features


===== PDF 198 / книга 184 =====
184 10 Convolutional networks
across multiple scales Lin et al. (2017b). In contrast, proposal-free schemes perform all the
processing in a single pass. YOLO Redmon et al. (2016), which was described in section 10.5.2,
is the most celebrated example of a proposal-free scheme. The most recent iteration of this
framework at the time of writing is YOLOv7 (Wang et al., 2022a). A recent review of object
detection can be found in Zou et al. (2023).
The semantic segmentation network described in section 10.5.3 was developed by Noh et al.
(2015). Many subsequent approaches have been variations of U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015),
which is described in section 11.5.3. Recent surveys of semantic segmentation can be found in
Minaee et al. (2021) and Ulku & Akagündüz (2022).
Visualizing Convolutional Networks: The dramatic success of convolutional networks led
to a series of efforts to visualize the information they extract from the image (see Qin et al., 2018,
for a review). Erhan et al. (2009) visualized the optimal stimulus that activated a hidden unit
by starting with an image containing noise and then optimizing the input to make the hidden
unit most active using gradient ascent. Zeiler & Fergus (2014) trained a network to reconstruct
the input and then set all the hidden units to zero except the one they were interested in;
the reconstruction then provides information about what drives the hidden unit. Mahendran
& Vedaldi (2015) visualized an entire layer of a network. Their network inversion technique
aimed to find an image that resulted in the activations at that layer but also incorporates prior
knowledge that encourages this image to have similar statistics to natural images.
Finally, Bau et al. (2017) introduced network dissection. Here, a series of images with known
pixel labels capturing color, texture, and object type are passed through the network, and the
correlation of a hidden unit with each property is measured. This method has the advantage
that it only uses the forward pass of the network and does not require optimization. These
methods did provide some partial insight into how the network processes images. For example,
Bau et al. (2017) showed that earlier layers correlate more with texture and color and later
layers with the object type. However, it is fair to say that fully understanding the processing
of networks containing millions of parameters is currently not possible.
Problems
Problem 10.1∗ Show that the operation in equation 10.4 is equivariant with respect to transla-
tion.
Problem 10.2 Equation 10.3 defines 1D convolution with a kernel size of three, stride of one,
and dilation one. Write out the equivalent equation for the 1D convolution with a kernel size
of three and a stride of two as pictured in figure 10.3a–b.
Problem 10.3 Write out the equation for the 1D dilated convolution with a kernel size of three
and a dilation rate of two, as pictured in figure 10.3d.
Problem 10.4 Write out the equation for a 1D convolution with kernel size of seven, a dilation
rate of three, and a stride of three.
Problem 10.5 Draw weight matrices in the style of figure 10.4d for (i) the strided convolution
in figure 10.3a–b, (ii) the convolution with kernel size 5 in figure 10.3c, and (iii) the dilated
convolution in figure 10.3d.


===== PDF 199 / книга 185 =====
Notes 185
Problem 10.6∗ Draw a 6×12 weight matrix in the style of figure 10.4d relating the inputs x1, . . . , x6
to the outputs h1, . . . , h12 in the multi-channel convolution as depicted in figures 10.5a–b.
P
to
ro
t
b
h
l
e
em
ou
1
tp
0
u
.7
t
∗
s
D
h′ 1
r
,
a
.
w
. .
a
,
1
h
2
′ 6
×
in
6 w
th
e
e
ig
m
ht
u
m
lti
a
-
t
c
r
h
i
a
x
n
i
n
n
e
t
l
h
c
e
o
s
n
t
v
y
o
le
lu
o
t
f
io
fi
n
gu
in
re
fi
1
g
0
u
.4
r
d
e
r
1
e
0
l
.
a
5
t
c
i
.
ng the inputs h1, . . . , h12
Problem 10.8 Consider a 1D convolutional network where the input has three channels. The
first hidden layer is computed using a kernel size of three and has four channels. The second
hidden layer is computed using a kernel size of five and has ten channels. How many biases and
how many weights are needed for each of these two convolutional layers?
Problem 10.9 A network consists of three 1D convolutional layers. At each layer, a zero-padded
convolution with kernel size three, stride one, and dilation one is applied. What size is the
receptive field of the hidden units in the third layer?
Problem 10.10 A network consists of three 1D convolutional layers. At each layer, a zero-
padded convolution with kernel size seven, stride one, and dilation one is applied. What size is
the receptive field of hidden units in the third layer?
Problem 10.11 Consider a convolutional network with 1D input x. The first hidden layer H1 is
computed using a convolution with kernel size five, stride two, and a dilation rate of one. The
second hidden layer H2 is computed using a convolution with kernel size three, stride one, and
a dilation rate of one. The third hidden layer H3 is computed using a convolution with kernel
size five, stride one, and a dilation rate of two. What are the receptive field sizes at each hidden
layer?
Problem 10.12 The 1D convolutional network in figure 10.7 was trained using stochastic gradient
descent with a learning rate of 0.01 and a batch size of 100 on a training dataset of 4,000 examples
for 100,000 steps. How many epochs was the network trained for?
Problem 10.13 Draw a weight matrix in the style of figure 10.4d that shows the relationship
between the 24 inputs and the 24 outputs in figure 10.9.
Problem 10.14 Consider a 2D convolutional layer with kernel size 5×5 that takes 3 input
channels and returns 10 output channels. How many convolutional weights are there? How
many biases?
Problem 10.15 Draw a weight matrix in the style of figure 10.4d that samples every other
variable in a 1D input (i.e., the 1D analog of figure 10.11a). Show that the weight matrix for
1D convolution with kernel size and stride two is equivalent to composing the matrices for 1D
convolution with kernel size one and this sampling matrix.
Problem 10.16∗ Consider the AlexNet network (figure 10.16). How many parameters are used
in each convolutional and fully connected layer? What is the total number of parameters?
Problem 10.17 What is the receptive field size at each of the first three layers of AlexNet
(figure 10.16)?
Problem 10.18 How many weights and biases are there at each convolutional layer and fully
connected layer in the VGG architecture (figure 10.17)?
t P iv ro e b ly l , em con 1 n 0 e . c 1 t 9 e ∗ d C b o y n a sid 3× er 3 tw co o nv h o id lu d t e i n on l a a l ye la r y s e o r f . s D iz e e sc 2 r 2 ib 4× e 2 h 2 o 4 w w to ith in C iti 1 al a i n ze d t C h 2 e w ch e a ig n h n t e s ls u , s r i e n s g pe H c e -
initialization.
