

===== PDF 221 / книга 207 =====
Chapter 12
Transformers
Chapter 10 introduced convolutional networks, which are specialized for processing data
that lie on a regular grid. They are particularly suited to processing images, which have
a very large number of input variables, precluding the use of fully connected networks.
Each layer of a convolutional network employs parameter sharing so that local image
patches are processed similarly at every position in the image.
This chapter introduces transformers. These were initially targeted at natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) problems, where the network input is a series of high-dimensional
embeddings representing words or word fragments. Language datasets share some of the
characteristics of image data. The number of input variables can be very large, and the
statistics are similar at every position; it’s not sensible to re-learn the meaning of the
word dog at every possible position in a body of text. However, language datasets have
the complication that text sequences vary in length, and unlike images, there is no easy
way to resize them.
12.1 Processing text data
To motivate the transformer, consider the following passage:
The restaurant refused to serve me a ham sandwich because it only cooks vegetarian
food. In the end, they just gave me two slices of bread. Their ambiance was just as good
as the food and service.
The goal is to design a network to process this text into a representation suitable for
downstream tasks. For example, it might be used to classify the review as positive or
negative or to answer questions such as “Does the restaurant serve steak?”.
We can make three immediate observations. First, the encoded input can be surpris-
ingly large. In this case, each of the 37 words might be represented by an embedding
vector of length 1024, so the encoded input would be of length 37 × 1024 = 37888 even
for this small passage. A more realistically sized body of text might have hundreds or
even thousands of words, so fully connected neural networks are impractical.


===== PDF 222 / книга 208 =====
208 12 Transformers
Second, one of the defining characteristics of NLP problems is that each input (one or
more sentences) is of a different length; hence, it’s not even obvious how to apply a fully
connected network. These observations suggest that the network should share parameters
across words at different input positions, similarly to how convolutional networks share
parameters across different image positions.
Third, language is ambiguous; it is unclear from the syntax alone that the pronoun it
refers to the restaurant and not to the ham sandwich. To understand the text, the word
it should somehow be connected to the word restaurant. In the parlance of transformers,
the former word should pay attention to the latter. This implies that there must be
connections between the words and that the strength of these connections will depend
on the words themselves. Moreover, these connections need to extend across large text
spans. For example, the word their in the last sentence also refers to the restaurant.
12.2 Dot-product self-attention
The previous section argued that a model for processing text will (i) use parameter
sharing to cope with long input passages of differing lengths and (ii) contain connections
between word representations that depend on the words themselves. The transformer
acquires both properties by using dot-product self-attention.
A standard neural network layer f[x], takes a D × 1 input x and applies a linear
transformation followed by an activation function like a ReLU, so:
f[x] = ReLU[β + Ωx], (12.1)
where β contains the biases, and Ω contains the weights.
A self-attention block sa[•] takes N inputs x1, . . . , xN , each of dimension D × 1, and
returns N output vectors of the same size. In the context of NLP, each input represents
a word or word fragment. First, a set of values are computed for each input:
vm = βv + Ωvxm, (12.2)
where βv and Ωv represent biases and weights, respectively.
Then the nth output san[x1, . . . , xN ] is a weighted sum of all the values v1, . . . , vN :
XN
san[x1, . . . , xN ] = a[xm, xn]vm. (12.3)
m=1
The scalar weight a[xm, xn] is the attention that the nth output pays to input xm. The N
weights a[•, xn] are non-negative and sum to one. Hence, self-attention can be thought
of as routing the values in different proportions to create each output (figure 12.1).
The following sections examine dot-product self-attention in more detail. First, we
consider the computation of the values and their subsequent weighting (equation 12.3).
Then we describe how to compute the attention weights a[xm, xn] themselves.


===== PDF 223 / книга 209 =====
12.2 Dot-product self-attention 209
Figure 12.1 Self-attention as routing. The self-attention mechanism takes N
inputs x1, . . . , xN ∈ RD (here N = 3 and D = 4) and processes each separately
to compute N value vectors. The nth output san[x1, . . . xN] (written as san[x•]
for short) is then computed as a weighted sum of the N value vectors, where the
weights are positive and sum to one. a) Output sa1[x•] is computed as a[x1, x1] =
0.1 times the first value vector, a[x2, x1] = 0.3 times the second value vector,
and a[x3, x1] = 0.6 times the third value vector. b) Output sa2[x•] is computed
in the same way, but this time with weights of 0.5, 0.2, and 0.3. c) The weighting
for output sa3[x•] is different again. Each output can hence be thought of as a
different routing of the N values.
12.2.1 Computing and weighting values
t E o qu ea a c t h ion in 1 p 2 u . t 2 x sh n o ∈ ws R t D ha . t T th h e is s c a o m m e p w u e t i a g t h io ts n Ω sc v a ∈ les R l D in × e D arl a y nd wi b t i h as t e h s e β s v eq ∈ ue R n D ce ar le e n a g p th pli N ed ,
so it requires fewer parameters than a fully connected network relating all DN inputs
to all DN outputs. The value computation can be viewed as a sparse matrix operation
with shared parameters (figure 12.2b).
The attention weights a[xm, xn] combine the values from different inputs. They
are also sparse since there is only one weight for each ordered pair of inputs (xm, xn),
regardless of the size of these inputs (figure 12.2c). It follows that the number of attention
weights has a quadratic dependence on the sequence length N, but is independent of the Problem 12.1
length D of each input xn.
12.2.2 Computing attention weights
In the previous section, we saw that the outputs result from two chained linear transfor-
mations; the value vectors βv + Ωvxm are computed independently for each input xm,
and these vectors are combined linearly by the attention weights a[xm, xn]. However, the
overall self-attention computation is nonlinear. As we’ll see shortly, the attention weights
are themselves nonlinear functions of the input. This is an example of a hypernetwork,
where one network branch computes the weights of another.


===== PDF 224 / книга 210 =====
210 12 Transformers
Figure 12.2 Self-attention for N = 3 inputs xn, each with dimension D = 4.
a) Each input xn is operated on independently by the same weights Ωv (same
c Ω w o e v l i o x g r h n t . eq E a u [ a x a c l m h s , o s x a u n m t ] p e u d t e w fi i e s n ig i a n h l g t i ) n t e a h a n e r d c c o o b n m ia t b r s i e i b n s u a β t t i i vo o n n (n o o o f f t t t h h s e h e o v m w al n u th ) es t v , o a w lu f i o t e r h m t a o t s t h h h e a e r v e n a d t l h u a e t o t s u en β tp tvi u o + t n .
b) Matrix showing block sparsity of linear transformation Ωv between inputs
and values. c) Matrix showing sparsity of attention weights relating values and
outputs.
To compute the attention, we apply two more linear transformations to the inputs:
qn = βq + Ωqxn
km = βk + Ωkxm, (12.4)
A D pp o e t n p d r i o x d B u . c 3 t .4 w pr h o e d r u e c { t q s n b } et a w n e d en {k th m e } q a u r e e ri t e e s rm an e d d k q e u y e s ri a e n s d an p d as k s e t y h s e , r r e e s s p ul e t c s ti t v h e r l o y u . g T h h a en so w ft e m c a o x m f p u u n t c e ti d o o n t :
(cid:2) (cid:3)
a[xm, xn] = softmaxm(cid:2) kT• q(cid:3)n
= P exp kT m(cid:2) qn (cid:3), (12.5)
N m′=1 exp kT m′qn
so for each xn, they are positive and sum to one (figure 12.3). For obvious reasons, this
is known as dot-product self-attention.
The names “queries” and “keys” were inherited from the field of information retrieval
and have the following interpretation: the dot product operation returns a measure of
similarity between its inputs, so the weights a[x•, xn] depend on the relative similarities
between the nth query and all of the keys. The softmax function means that the key
vectors “compete” with one another to contribute to the final result. The queries and
keys must have the same dimensions. However, these can differ from the dimension of


===== PDF 225 / книга 211 =====
12.2 Dot-product self-attention 211
Figure 12.3 Computing attention weights. a) Query vectors qn = βq + Ωqxn
p an ro d d k u e c y ts v b ec e t tw or e s en kn ea = ch β qku + ery Ωk a x n n d a th re e c t o h m re p e u k t e e y d s fo a r re ea p c a h ss i e n d pu th t r x ou n g . h b a ) T so h f e tm d a o x t
function to form non-negative attentions that sum to one. c) These route the
value vectors (figure 12.1) via the sparse matrix from figure 12.2c.
the values, which is usually the same size as the input, so the representation doesn’t Problem 12.2
change size.
12.2.3 Self-attention summary
The nth output is a weighted sum of the same linear transformation v• = βv + Ωvx•
applied to all of the inputs, where these attention weights are positive and sum to one.
The weights depend on a measure of similarity between input xn and the other inputs.
There is no activation function, but the mechanism is nonlinear due to the dot-product
and a softmax operation used to compute the attention weights.
Note that this mechanism fulfills the initial requirements. First, there is a single
shared set of parameters ϕ = {βv, Ωv, βq, Ωq, βk, Ωk}. This is independent of the


===== PDF 226 / книга 212 =====
212 12 Transformers
Figure 12.4 Self-attention in matrix form. Self-attention can be implemented
eﬀiciently if we store the N input vectors xn in the columns of the D×N matrix X.
The input X is operated on separately by the query matrix Q, key matrix K, and
value matrix V. The dot products are then computed using matrix multiplication,
and a softmax operation is applied independently to each column of the resulting
matrix to calculate the attentions. Finally, the values are post-multiplied by the
attentions to create an output of the same size as the input.
number of inputs N, so the network can be applied to different sequence lengths. Second,
there are connections between the inputs (words), and the strength of these connections
depends on the inputs themselves via the attention weights.
12.2.4 Matrix form
The above computation can be written in a compact form if the N inputs xn form the
columns of the D × N matrix X. The values, queries, and keys can be computed as:
V[X] = βv1T + ΩvX
Q[X] = βq1T + ΩqX
K[X] = βk1T + ΩkX, (12.6)
where 1 is an N × 1 vector containing ones. The self-attention computation is then:
h i
Sa[X] = V[X] · Softmax K[X]T Q[X] , (12.7)


===== PDF 227 / книга 213 =====
12.3 Extensions to dot-product self-attention 213
Figure 12.5 Positional encodings. The
self-attention architecture is equivariant
to permutations of the inputs. To en-
sure that inputs at different positions are
treated differently, a positional encoding
matrix Π can be added to the data ma-
trix. Each column is different, so the po-
sitions can be distinguished. Here, the
position encodings use a predefined pro-
cedural sinusoidal pattern (which can be
extended to larger values of N if neces-
sary). However, in other cases, they are
learned.
where the function Softmax[•] takes a matrix and performs the softmax operation
independently on each of its columns (figure 12.4). In this formulation, we have explicitly
included the dependence of the values, queries, and keys on the input X to emphasize N S o el t f e - b at o t o e k nt 1 i 2 o . n 1
that self-attention computes a kind of triple product based on the inputs. However, from
now on, we will drop this dependence and just write:
Sa[X] = V · Softmax[KT Q]. (12.8)
12.3 Extensions to dot-product self-attention
In the previous section, we described self-attention. Here, we introduce three extensions
that are almost always used in practice.
12.3.1 Positional encoding
Observant readers will have noticed that the self-attention mechanism discards important
information: the computation is the same regardless of the order of the inputs xn. Problem 12.3
More precisely, it is equivariant with respect to input permutations. However, order is
important when the inputs correspond to the words in a sentence. The sentence The
woman ate the raccoon has a different meaning than The raccoon ate the woman. There
are two main approaches to incorporating position information.
Absolute positional encodings: A matrix Π is added to the input X that encodes
positional information (figure 12.5). Each column of Π is unique and hence contains
information about the absolute position in the input sequence. This matrix can be
chosen by hand or learned. It may be added to the network inputs or at every network
layer. Sometimes it is added to X in the computation of the queries and keys but not
to the values.


===== PDF 228 / книга 214 =====
214 12 Transformers
Relative positional encodings: The input to a self-attention mechanism may be an
entire sentence, many sentences, or just a fragment of a sentence, and the absolute
position of a word is much less important than the relative position between two inputs.
Of course, this can be recovered if the system knows the absolute position of both,
but relative positional encodings encode this information directly. Each element of the
attention matrix corresponds to a particular offset between query position a and key
position b. Relative positional encodings learn a parameter πa,b for each offset and use
this to modify the attention matrix by adding these values, multiplying by them, or
using them to alter the attention matrix in some other way.
12.3.2 Scaled dot product self-attention
The dot products in the attention computation can have large magnitudes and move
the arguments to the softmax function into a region where the largest value completely
dominates. Small changes to the inputs to the softmax function now have little effect on
Problem 12.4 the output (i.e., the gradients are very small), making the model diﬀicult to train. To
prevent this, the dot products are scaled by the square root of the dimension Dq of the
queries and keys (i.e., the number of rows in Ωq and Ωk, which must be the same):
" #
Sa[X] = V · Softmax K√T Q . (12.9)
Dq
This is known as scaled dot product self-attention.
12.3.3 Multiple heads
Multiple self-attention mechanisms are usually applied in parallel, and this is known as
multi-head self-attention. Now H different sets of values, keys, and queries are computed:
Vh = βvh1T + ΩvhX
Qh = βqh1T + ΩqhX
Kh = βkh1T + ΩkhX. (12.10)
The hth self-attention mechanism or head can be written as:
" #
Sah[X] = Vh · Softmax K√T h
D
Q
q
h , (12.11)
where we have different parameters {βvh, Ωvh}, {βqh, Ωqh}, and {βkh, Ωkh} for each
head. Typically, if the dimension of the inputs xm is D and there are H heads, the values,
queries, and keys will all be of size D/H, as this allows for an eﬀicient implementation.
Problem 12.5 The outputs of these self-attention mechanisms are vertically concatenated, and another
linear transform Ωc is applied to combine them (figure 12.6):


===== PDF 229 / книга 215 =====
12.4 Transformers 215
Figure 12.6 Multi-head self-attention. Self-attention occurs in parallel across
multiple “heads.” Each has its own queries, keys, and values. Here two heads are
depicted, in the cyan and orange boxes, respectively. The outputs are vertically
concatenated, and another linear transformation Ωc is used to recombine them.
h i
MhSa[X] = Ωc Sa1[X]T , Sa2[X]T , . . . , SaH[X]T T . (12.12)
Notebook 12.2
Multiple heads seem to be necessary to make the transformer work well. It has been Multi-head
speculated that they make the self-attention network more robust to bad initializations. self-attention
12.4 Transformers
Self-attention is just one part of a larger transformer mechanism. This consists of a
multi-head self-attention unit (which allows the word representations to interact with


===== PDF 230 / книга 216 =====
216 12 Transformers
Figure 12.7 The transformer. The input consists of a D × N matrix containing
the D-dimensional word embeddings for each of the N input tokens. The output
is a matrix of the same size. The transformer consists of a series of operations.
First, there is a multi-head attention block, allowing the word embeddings to
interact with one another. This forms the processing of a residual block, so the
inputs are added back to the output. Second, a LayerNorm operation is applied.
Third, there is a second residual layer where the same fully connected neural
network is applied separately to each of the N word representations (columns).
Finally, LayerNorm is applied again.
each other) followed by a fully connected network mlp[x•] (that operates separately
on each word). Both units are residual networks (i.e., their output is added back to
the original input). In addition, it is typical to add a LayerNorm operation after both
the self-attention and fully connected networks. This is similar to BatchNorm but uses
statistics across the tokens within a single input sequence to perform the normalization
(section 11.4 and figure 11.14). The complete layer can be described by the following
series of operations (figure 12.7):
X ← X + MhSa[X]
X ← LayerNorm[X]
xn ← xn + mlp[xn] ∀ n ∈ {1, . . . , N}
X ← LayerNorm[X], (12.13)
where the column vectors xn are separately taken from the full data matrix X. In a real
network, the data passes through a series of these transformers.
12.5 Transformers for natural language processing
The previous section described the transformer. This section describes how it is used in
natural language processing (NLP) tasks. A typical NLP pipeline starts with a tokenizer
that splits the text into words or word fragments. Then each of these tokens is mapped


===== PDF 231 / книга 217 =====
12.5 Transformers for natural language processing 217
Figure 12.8 Sub-word tokenization. a) A passage of text from a nursery rhyme.
The tokens are initially just the characters and whitespace (represented by an un-
derscore), and their frequencies are displayed in the table. b) At each iteration,
the sub-word tokenizer looks for the most commonly occurring adjacent pair of
characters (in this case, se) and merges them. This creates a new token and de-
creases the counts for the original tokens s and e. c) At the second iteration, the
algorithm merges e and the whitespace character_. Note that the last character
of the first token to be merged cannot be whitespace, which prevents merging
across words. d) After 22 iterations, the tokens consist of a mix of letters, word
fragments, and commonly occurring words. e) If we continue this process indefi-
nitely, the tokens eventually represent the full words. f) Over time, the number
of tokens increases as we add word fragments to the letters and then decreases
again as we merge these fragments. In a real situation, there would be a very
large number of words, and the algorithm would terminate when the vocabulary
size (number of tokens) reached a predetermined value. Punctuation and capital
letters would also be treated as separate input characters.


===== PDF 232 / книга 218 =====
218 12 Transformers
to a learned embedding. These embeddings are passed through a series of transformers.
We now consider each of these stages in turn.
12.5.1 Tokenization
A text processing pipeline begins with a tokenizer. This splits the text into smaller
constituent units (tokens) from a vocabulary of possible tokens. In the discussion above,
we have implied that these tokens represent words, but there are several diﬀiculties.
• Inevitably, some words (e.g., names) will not be in the vocabulary.
• It’s unclear how to handle punctuation, but this is important. If a sentence ends
in a question mark, we must encode this information.
• The vocabulary would need different tokens for versions of the same word with
different suﬀixes (e.g., walk, walks, walked, walking), and there is no way to clarify
that these variations are related.
One approach would be to use letters and punctuation marks as the vocabulary, but this
would mean splitting text into very small parts and requiring the subsequent network to
re-learn the relations between them.
In practice, a compromise between letters and full words is used, and the final vo-
N T o o t k e e b n o i o z k at 1 io 2 n .3 cabulary includes both common words and word fragments from which larger and less
frequent words can be composed. The vocabulary is computed using a sub-word tok-
enizer such as byte pair encoding (figure 12.8) that greedily merges commonly occurring
sub-strings based on their frequency.
12.5.2 Embeddings
Each token in the vocabulary V is mapped to a unique word embedding, and the embed-
d th in e g N s fo in r p t u h t e t w o h k o en le s v a o r c e a fi b r u s l t ar e y nc a o re de s d to i r n ed th in e m a m at a ri t x rix T Ω ∈ e R ∈ |V R |× D N × , |V w |. h T er o e a t c h c e om nt p h li c sh olu th m is n ,
corresponds to the nth token and is a |V| × 1 one-hot vector (i.e., a vector where every
entry is zero except for the entry corresponding to the token, which is set to one). The
input embeddings are computed as X = ΩeT, and Ωe is learned like any other network
parameter (figure 12.9). A typical embedding size D is 1024, and a typical total vocab-
ulary size |V| is 30,000, so even before the main network, there are many parameters
in Ωe to learn.
12.5.3 Transformer model
Finally, the embedding matrix X representing the text is passed through a series of K
transformers, called a transformer model. There are three types of transformer models.
An encoder transforms the text embeddings into a representation that can support a


===== PDF 233 / книга 219 =====
12.6 Encoder model example: BERT 219
Figure 12.9 The input embedding matrix X ∈ RD×N contains N embeddings of
length D and is created by multiplying a matrix Ωe containing the embeddings
for the entire vocabulary with a matrix containing one-hot vectors in its columns
that correspond to the word or sub-word indices. The vocabulary matrix Ωe is
considered a parameter of the model and is learned along with the other param-
eters. Note that the two embeddings for the word an in X are the same.
variety of tasks. A decoder predicts the next token to continue the input text. Encoder-
decoders are used in sequence-to-sequence tasks, where one text string is converted into
another (e.g., machine translation). These variations are described in sections 12.6–12.8,
respectively.
12.6 Encoder model example: BERT
BERT is an encoder model that uses a vocabulary of 30,000 tokens. Input tokens are
converted to 1024-dimensional word embeddings and passed through 24 transformers.
Each contains a self-attention mechanism with 16 heads. The queries, keys, and values
for each head are of dimension 64 (i.e., the matrices Ωvh, Ωqh, Ωkh are 1024 × 64). The
dimension of the single hidden layer in the fully connected network in the transformer is
4096. The total number of parameters is ∼ 340 million. When BERT was introduced,
this was considered large, but it is now much smaller than state-of-the-art models.
Encoder models like BERT exploit transfer learning (section 9.3.6). During pre-
training, the parameters of the transformer architecture are learned using self-supervision
from a large corpus of text. The goal here is for the model to learn general information
about the statistics of language. In the fine-tuning stage, the resulting network is adapted
to solve a particular task using a smaller body of supervised training data.


===== PDF 234 / книга 220 =====
220 12 Transformers
Figure 12.10 Pre-training for BERT-like encoder. The input tokens (and a spe-
cial <cls> token denoting the start of the sequence) are converted to word em-
beddings. Here, these are represented as rows rather than columns, so the box
labeled “word embeddings” is XT . These embeddings are passed through a series
of transformers (orange connections indicate that every token attends to every
other token in these layers) to create a set of output embeddings. A small frac-
tion of the input tokens is randomly replaced with a generic <mask> token. In
pre-training, the goal is to predict the missing word from the associated output
embedding. As such, the output embeddings are passed through a softmax func-
tion, and the multiclass classification loss (section 5.24) is used. This task has
the advantage that it uses both the left and right context to predict the missing
word but has the disadvantage that it does not make eﬀicient use of data; here,
seven tokens need to be processed to add two terms to the loss function.
12.6.1 Pre-training
In the pre-training stage, the network is trained using self-supervision. This allows the
use of enormous amounts of data without the need for manual labels. For BERT, the self-
supervision task consists of predicting missing words from sentences from a large internet
Problem 12.6 corpus (figure 12.10).1 During training, the maximum input length is 512 tokens, and
the batch size is 256. The system is trained for a million steps, corresponding to roughly
50 epochs of the 3.3-billion word corpus.
Predicting missing words forces the transformer network to understand some syntax.
For example, it might learn that the adjective red is often found before nouns like house
or car but never before a verb like shout. It also allows the model to learn superficial
common sense about the world. For example, after training, the model will assign a
higher probability to the missing word train in the sentence The <mask> pulled into
the station than it would to the word peanut. However, the degree of “understanding”
this type of model can ever have is limited.
1BERT also uses a secondary task that predicts whether two sentences were originally adjacent in
the text or not, but this only marginally improves performance.


===== PDF 235 / книга 221 =====
12.6 Encoder model example: BERT 221
Figure 12.11 After pre-training, the encoder is fine-tuned using manually labeled
data to solve a particular task. Usually, a linear transformation or a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) is appended to the encoder to produce whatever output is
required. a) Example text classification task. In this sentiment classification
task, the <cls> token embedding is used to predict the probability that the
review is positive. b) Example word classification task. In this named entity
recognition problem, the embedding for each word is used to predict whether the
word corresponds to a person, place, or organization, or is not an entity.
12.6.2 Fine-tuning
In the fine-tuning stage, the model parameters are adjusted to specialize the network to
a particular task. An extra layer is appended onto the transformer network to convert
the output vectors to the desired output format. Examples include:
Text classification: In BERT, a special token known as the classification or <cls>
token is placed at the start of each string during pre-training. For text classification
tasks like sentiment analysis (in which the passage is labeled as having a positive or
negative emotional tone), the vector associated with the <cls> token is mapped to a
single number and passed through a logistic sigmoid (figure 12.11a). This contributes to
a standard binary cross-entropy loss (section 5.4).


===== PDF 236 / книга 222 =====
222 12 Transformers
Word classification: The goal of named entity recognition is to classify each word as
an entity type (e.g., person, place, organization, or no-entity). To this end, each input
embedding xn is mapped to an E × 1 vector where the E entries correspond to the E
entity types. This is passed through a softmax function to create probabilities for each
class, which contribute to a multiclass cross-entropy loss (figure 12.11b).
Text span prediction: In the SQuAD 1.1 question answering task, the question and a
passage from Wikipedia containing the answer are concatenated and tokenized. BERT
is then used to predict the text span in the passage that contains the answer. Each
token maps to two numbers indicating how likely it is that the text span begins and
ends at this location. The resulting two sets of numbers are put through two softmax
functions. The likelihood of any text span being the answer can be derived by combining
the probability of starting and ending at the appropriate places.
12.7 Decoder model example: GPT3
This section presents a high-level description of GPT3, an example of a decoder model.
The basic architecture is extremely similar to the encoder model and comprises a series of
transformers that operate on learned word embeddings. However, the goal is different.
The encoder aimed to build a representation of the text that could be fine-tuned to
solve a variety of more specific NLP tasks. Conversely, the decoder has one purpose: to
generate the next token in a sequence. It can generate a coherent text passage by feeding
the extended sequence back into the model.
12.7.1 Language modeling
GPT3 constructs an autoregressive language model. This is easiest to understand with
a concrete example. Consider the sentence It takes great courage to let yourself appear
weak. For simplicity, let’s assume that the tokens are the full words. The probability of
the full sentence is:
P r(It takes great courage to let yourself appear weak) =
P r(It) × P r(takes|It) × P r(great|It takes) × P r(courage|It takes great) ×
P r(to|It takes great courage) × P r(let|It takes great courage to) ×
P r(yourself|It takes great courage to let) ×
P r(appear|It takes great courage to let yourself) ×
P r(weak|It takes great courage to let yourself appear). (12.14)
More formally, an autoregressive model factors the joint probability P r(t1, t2, . . . , tN ) of
the N observed tokens into an autoregressive sequence:


===== PDF 237 / книга 223 =====
12.7 Decoder model example: GPT3 223
YN
P r(t1, t2, . . . , tN ) = P r(t1) P r(tn|t1, . . . , tn−1). (12.15)
n=2
The autoregressive formulation demonstrates the connection between maximizing the log
probability of the tokens in the loss function and the next token prediction task.
12.7.2 Masked self-attention
To train a decoder, we maximize the log probability of the input text under the autore-
gressive model. Ideally, we would pass in the whole sentence and compute all the log
probabilities and gradients simultaneously. However, this poses a problem; if we pass in
the full sentence, the term computing log [P r(great|It takes)] has access to both the an-
swer great and the right context courage to let yourself appear weak. Hence, the system
can cheat rather than learn to predict the following words and will not train properly.
Fortunately, the tokens only interact in the self-attention layers in a transformer
network. Hence, the problem can be resolved by ensuring that the attention to the
answer and the right context is zero. This can be achieved by setting the corresponding
dot products in the self-attention computation (equation 12.5) to negative infinity before
they are passed through the softmax[•] function. This is known as masked self-attention.
The effect is to make the weight of all the upward-angled arrows in figure 12.1 zero.
The entire decoder network operates as follows. The input text is tokenized, and the
tokens are converted to embeddings. The embeddings are passed into the transformer
network, but now the transformers use masked self-attention so that they can only attend
to the current and previous tokens. Each of the output embeddings can be thought of as
representing a partial sentence, and for each, the goal is to predict the next token in the
sequence. Consequently, after the transformers, a linear layer maps each word embedding
to the size of the vocabulary, followed by a softmax[•] function that converts these values
to probabilities. During training, we aim to maximize the sum of the log probabilities of
the next token in the ground truth sequence at every position using a standard multiclass
cross-entropy loss (figure 12.12).
12.7.3 Generating text from a decoder
The autoregressive language model is the first example of a generative model discussed
in this book. Since it defines a probability model over text sequences, it can be used
to sample new examples of plausible text. To generate from the model, we start with
an input sequence of text (which might be just a special <start> token indicating the
beginning of the sequence) and feed this into the network, which then outputs the proba-
bilities over possible subsequent tokens. We can then either pick the most likely token or
sample from this probability distribution. The new extended sequence can be fed back
into the decoder network that outputs the probability distribution over the next token.
By repeating this process, we can generate large bodies of text. The computation can
be made quite eﬀicient as prior embeddings do not depend on subsequent ones due to


===== PDF 238 / книга 224 =====
224 12 Transformers
Figure 12.12 Training GPT3-type decoder network. The tokens are mapped to
word embeddings with a special <start> token at the beginning of the sequence.
The embeddings are passed through a series of transformers that use masked
self-attention. Here, each position in the sentence can only attend to its own
embedding and the embeddings of tokens earlier in the sequence (orange connec-
tions). The goal at each position is to maximize the probability of the following
ground truth token in the sequence. In other words, at position one, we want to
maximize the probability of the token It; at position two, we want to maximize
the probability of the token takes; and so on. Masked self-attention ensures the
system cannot cheat by looking at subsequent inputs. The autoregressive task has
the advantage of making eﬀicient use of the data since every word contributes a
term to the loss function. However, it only exploits the left context of each word.
the masked self-attention. Hence, much of the earlier computation can be recycled as we
Problem 12.7 generate subsequent tokens.
In practice, many strategies can make the output text more coherent. For example,
No D te e b c o o o d k in 1 g 2.4 beam search keeps track of multiple possible sentence completions to find the overall most
strategies likely (which is not necessarily found by greedily choosing the most likely next word at
each step). Top-k sampling randomly draws the next word from only the top-K most
likely possibilities to prevent the system from accidentally choosing from the long tail of
low-probability tokens and leading to an unnecessary linguistic dead end.
12.7.4 GPT3 and few-shot learning
Large language models like GPT3 apply these ideas on a massive scale. In GPT3, the
sequence lengths are 2048 tokens long, and the total batch size is 3.2 million tokens.
There are 96 transformers (some of which implement a sparse version of attention), each
processing a word embedding of size 12288. There are 96 heads in the self-attention
layers, and the value, query, and key dimension is 128. It is trained with 300 billion
tokens and contains 175 billion parameters.


===== PDF 239 / книга 225 =====
12.7 Decoder model example: GPT3 225
Here’s an example of completing text from the GPT3 model where the text provided
to the model is in orange, and the generated text is in cyan:
Understanding Deep Learning is a new textbook from MIT Press by Simon Prince that’s de-
signed to offer an accessible, broad introduction to the field. Deep learning is a branch of
machine learning that is concerned with algorithms that learn from data that is unstructured
or unlabeled. The book is divided into four sections:
1. Introduction to deep learning
2. Deep learning architecture
3. Deep learning algorithms
4. Applications of deep learning
The first section offers an introduction to deep learning, including its history and origins.
The second section covers deep learning architecture, discussing various types of neural net-
works and their applications. The third section dives into deep learning algorithms, including
supervised and unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, and more. The fourth section
applies deep learning to various domains, such as computer vision, natural language processing,
and robotics.
This continuation is plausible, albeit only partially accurate.
One surprising property of learning models on this scale is that they can perform many
tasks without fine-tuning. If we provide several examples of correct question/answer pairs
and then another question, they often answer the final question correctly by completing
the sequence. One example is correcting English grammar:
Poor English input: I eated the purple berries.
Good English output: I ate the purple berries.
Poor English input: Thank you for picking me as your designer. I’d appreciate it.
Good English output: Thank you for choosing me as your designer. I appreciate it.
Poor English input: The mentioned changes have done. or I did the alteration that you
requested. or I changed things you wanted and did the modifications.
Good English output: The requested changes have been made. or I made the alteration that
you requested. or I changed things you wanted and made the modifications.
Poor English input: I’d be more than happy to work with you in another project.
Good English output: I’d be more than happy to work with you on another project.
(result from Brown et al., 2020)
Here, the text containing the paired examples in orange was provided as context for
GPT3, and the system then generated the correct answer in cyan. This phenomenon
extends to many situations, including generating code snippets based on natural language
descriptions, arithmetic, translating between languages, and answering questions about
text passages. Consequently, it is argued that enormous language models are few-shot
learners; they can learn to do novel tasks based on just a few examples. However,
performance is erratic in practice, and the extent to which it is extrapolating from
learned examples rather than merely interpolating or copying verbatim is unclear.


===== PDF 240 / книга 226 =====
226 12 Transformers
Figure 12.13 Encoder-decoder architecture. Two sentences are passed to the
system with the goal of translating the first into the second. a) The first sentence
is passed through a standard encoder. b) The second sentence is passed through a
decoder that uses masked self-attention but also attends to the output embeddings
of the encoder using cross-attention (orange rectangle). The loss function is the
same as for the decoder model; we want to maximize the probability of the next
word in the output sequence.
12.8 Encoder-decoder model example: machine translation
Translation between languages is an example of a sequence-to-sequence task. This re-
quires an encoder (to compute a good representation of the source sentence) and a
decoder (to generate the sentence in the target language). This task can be tackled
using an encoder-decoder model.
Consider translating from English to French. The encoder receives the sentence in
English and processes it through a series of transformers to create an output representa-
tion for each token. During training, the decoder receives the ground truth translation
in French and passes it through a series of transformers that use masked self-attention
and predict the following word at each position. However, the decoder layers also attend
to the output of the encoder. Consequently, each French output word is conditioned on


===== PDF 241 / книга 227 =====
12.9 Transformers for long sequences 227
Figure 12.14 Cross-attention. The flow of computation is the same as in stan-
dard self-attention. However, the queries are calculated from the decoder embed-
dings Xdec, and the keys and values from the encoder embeddings Xenc. In the
context of translation, the encoder contains information about the source lan-
guage, and the decoder contains information about the target language statistics.
the previous output words and the source English sentence (figure 12.13).
This is achieved by modifying the transformers in the decoder. The original trans-
former in the decoder (figure 12.12) consisted of a masked self-attention layer followed
by a neural network applied individually to each embedding. A new self-attention layer
is added between these two components, in which the decoder embeddings attend to the
encoder embeddings. This uses a version of self-attention known as encoder-decoder at-
tention or cross-attention, where the queries are computed from the decoder embeddings
and the keys and values from the encoder embeddings (figure 12.14).
12.9 Transformers for long sequences
Since each token in a transformer encoder model interacts with every other token, the
computational complexity scales quadratically with the length of the sequence. For a
decoder model, each token only interacts with previous tokens, so there are roughly
half the number of interactions, but the complexity still scales quadratically. These
relationships can be visualized as interaction matrices (figure 12.15a–b).
This quadratic increase in the amount of computation ultimately limits the length of
sequences that can be used. Many methods have been developed to extend the trans-


===== PDF 242 / книга 228 =====
228 12 Transformers
Figure 12.15 Interaction matrices for self-attention. a) In an encoder, every token
interacts with every other token, and computation expands quadratically with the
number of tokens. b) In a decoder, each token only interacts with the previous
tokens, but complexity is still quadratic. c) Complexity can be reduced by using
a convolutional structure (encoder case). d) Convolutional structure for decoder
case. e–f) Convolutional structure with dilation rate of two and three (decoder
case). g) Another strategy is to allow selected tokens to interact with all the
other tokens (encoder case) or all the previous tokens (decoder case pictured).
h) Alternatively, global tokens can be introduced (left two columns and top two
rows). These interact with all of the tokens as well as with each other.
former to cope with longer sequences. One approach is to prune the self-attention in-
teractions or, equivalently, to sparsify the interaction matrix (figures 12.15c-h). For
example, this can be restricted to a convolutional structure so that each token only in-
teracts with a few neighboring tokens. Across multiple layers, tokens still interact at
larger distances as the receptive field expands. As for convolution in images, the kernel
can vary in size and dilation rate.
A pure convolutional approach requires many layers to integrate information over
large distances. One way to speed up this process is to allow select tokens (perhaps at
the start of every sentence) to attend to all other tokens (encoder model) or all previous
tokens (decoder model). A similar idea is to have a small number of global tokens that
connect to all the other tokens and themselves. Like the <cls> token, these do not
represent any word but serve to provide long-distance connections.
12.10 Transformers for images
Transformers were initially developed for text data. Their enormous success in this area
led to experimentation on images. This was not obviously a promising idea for two


===== PDF 243 / книга 229 =====
12.10 Transformers for images 229
reasons. First, there are many more pixels in an image than words in a sentence, so the
quadratic complexity of self-attention poses a practical bottleneck. Second, convolutional
nets have a good inductive bias because each layer is equivariant to spatial translation,
and they take into account the 2D structure of the image. However, this must be learned
in a transformer network.
Regardless of these apparent disadvantages, transformer networks for images have
now eclipsed the performance of convolutional networks for image classification and other
tasks. This is partly because of the enormous scale at which they can be constructed
and the large amounts of data that can be used to pre-train the networks. This section
describes transformer models for images.
12.10.1 ImageGPT
ImageGPT is a transformer decoder; it builds an autoregressive model of image pixels
that ingests a partial image and predicts the subsequent pixel value. The quadratic
complexity of the transformer network means that the largest model (which contained
6.8 billion parameters) could still only operate on 64×64 images. Moreover, to make this
tractable, the original 24-bit RGB color space had to be quantized into a nine-bit color
space, so the system ingests (and predicts) one of 512 possible tokens at each position.
Images are naturally 2D objects, but ImageGPT simply learns a different positional
encoding at each pixel. Hence it must learn that each pixel has a close relationship with
its preceding neighbors and also with nearby pixels in the row above. Figure 12.16 shows
example generation results.
The internal representation of this decoder was used as a basis for image classification.
The final pixel embeddings are averaged, and a linear layer maps these to activations
which are passed through a softmax layer to predict class probabilities. The system is pre-
trained on a large corpus of web images and then fine-tuned on the ImageNet database
resized to 48 × 48 pixels using a loss function that contains both a cross-entropy term for
image classification and a generative loss term for predicting the pixels. Despite using a
large amount of external training data, the system achieved only a 27.4% top-1 error rate
on ImageNet (figure 10.15). This was less than convolutional architectures of the time
(see figure 10.21) but is still impressive given the small input image size; unsurprisingly,
it fails to classify images where the target object is small or thin.
12.10.2 Vision Transformer (ViT)
The Vision Transformer tackled the problem of image resolution by dividing the image
into 16×16 patches (figure 12.17). Each patch is mapped to a lower dimension via a
learned linear transformation, and these representations are fed into the transformer Problem 12.8
network. Once again, standard 1D positional encodings are learned.
This is an encoder model with a <cls> token (see figures 12.10–12.11). However,
unlike BERT, it uses supervised pre-training on a large database of 303 million labeled
images from 18,000 classes. The <cls> token is mapped via a final network layer to
create activations that are fed into a softmax function to generate class probabilities.
After pre-training, the system is applied to the final classification task by replacing this


===== PDF 244 / книга 230 =====
230 12 Transformers
Figure 12.16 ImageGPT. a) Images generated from the autoregressive ImageGPT
model. The top-left pixel is drawn from the estimated empirical distribution at
this position. Subsequent pixels are generated in turn, conditioned on the previous
ones, working along the rows until the bottom-right of the image is reached. For
each pixel, the transformer decoder generates a conditional distribution as in
equation 12.15, and a sample is drawn. The extended sequence is then fed back
into the network to generate the next pixel, and so on. b) Image completion.
In each case, the lower half of the image is removed (top row), and ImageGPT
completes the remaining part pixel by pixel (three different completions shown).
Adapted from https://openai.com/blog/image-gpt/.
final layer with one that maps to the desired number of classes and is fine-tuned.
For the ImageNet benchmark, this system achieved an 11.45% top-1 error rate. How-
ever, it did not perform as well as the best contemporary convolutional networks without
supervised pre-training. The strong inductive bias of convolutional networks can only
be superseded by employing extremely large amounts of training data.
12.10.3 Multi-scale vision transformers
The Vision Transformer differs from convolutional architectures in that it operates on
a single scale. Several transformer models that process the image at multiple scales
have been proposed. Similarly to convolutional networks, these generally start with
high-resolution patches and few channels and gradually decrease the resolution while
simultaneously increasing the number of channels.


===== PDF 245 / книга 231 =====
12.10 Transformers for images 231
Figure 12.17 Vision transformer. The Vision Transformer (ViT) breaks the image
into a grid of patches (16×16 in the original implementation). Each of these
is projected via a learned linear transformation to become a patch embedding.
These patch embeddings are fed into a transformer encoder network, and the
<cls> token is used to predict the class probabilities.
Figure 12.18 Shifted window (SWin) transformer (Liu et al., 2021c). a) Origi-
nal image. b) The SWin transformer breaks the image into a grid of windows
and each of these windows into a sub-grid of patches. The transformer network
applies self-attention to the patches within each window independently. c) Each
alternate layer shifts the windows so that the subsets of patches that interact
with one another change, and information can propagate across the whole image.
d) After several layers, the 2 × 2 blocks of patch representations are concatenated
to increase the effective patch (and window) size. e) Alternate layers use shifted
windows at this new lower resolution. f) Eventually, the resolution is such that
there is just a single window, and the patches span the entire image.


===== PDF 246 / книга 232 =====
232 12 Transformers
A representative example of a multi-scale transformer is the shifted-window or SWin
transformer. This is an encoder transformer that divides the image into patches and
groups these patches into a grid of windows within which self-attention is applied in-
dependently (figure 12.18). These windows are shifted in adjacent transformers, so the
effective receptive field at a given patch can expand beyond the window border.
The scale is reduced periodically by concatenating features from non-overlapping 2×2
patches and applying a linear transformation that maps these concatenated features to
twice the original number of channels. This architecture does not have a <cls> token
but instead averages the output features at the last layer. These are then mapped via a
linear layer to the desired number of classes and passed through a softmax function to
output class probabilities. At the time of writing, the most sophisticated version of this
architecture achieves a 9.89% top-1 error rate on the ImageNet database.
A related idea is periodically to integrate information from across the whole image.
Dual attention vision transformers (DaViT) alternate two types of transformers. In the
first, image patches attend to one another, and the self-attention computation uses all
the channels. In the second, the channels attend to one another, and the self-attention
computation uses all the image patches. This architecture reaches a 9.60% top-1 error
Problem 12.9 rate on ImageNet and is close to the state-of-the-art at the time of writing.
12.11 Summary
This chapter introduced self-attention and the transformer architecture. Encoder, de-
coder, and encoder-decoder models were then described. The transformer operates on
sets of high-dimensional embeddings. It has a low computational complexity per layer,
and much of the computation can be performed in parallel using the matrix form. Since
every input embedding interacts with every other, it can describe long-range dependen-
cies in text. Ultimately, the computation scales quadratically with the sequence length;
one approach to reducing the complexity is sparsifying the interaction matrix.
The training of transformers with very large unlabeled datasets is the first example
of unsupervised learning (learning without labels) in this book. Encoders learn a repre-
sentation that can be used for other tasks by predicting missing tokens. Decoders build
an autoregressive model over the inputs and are the first example of a generative model
in this book. The generative decoders can be used to create new data examples.
Chapter 13 considers networks for processing graph data. These have connections
with transformers in that the nodes of the graph attend to one another in each network
layer. Chapters 14–18 return to unsupervised learning and generative models.
Notes
Natural language processing: Transformers were developed for natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. This is an enormous area that deals with text analysis, categorization, generation,
and manipulation. Example tasks include part of speech tagging, translation, text classification,
entity recognition (people, places, companies, etc.), text summarization, question answering,


===== PDF 247 / книга 233 =====
Notes 233
Figure 12.19 Recurrent neural networks (RNNs). The word embeddings are
passed sequentially through a series of identical neural networks. Each network
has two outputs; one is the output embedding, and the other (orange arrows)
feeds back into the next neural network, along with the next word embedding.
Each output embedding contains information about the word itself and its con-
text in the preceding sentence fragment. In principle, the final output contains
information about the entire sentence and could be used to support classification
tasks similarly to the <cls> token in a transformer encoder model. However,
RNNs sometimes gradually “forget” about tokens that are further back in time.
word sense disambiguation, and document clustering. NLP was initially tackled by rule-based
methods that exploited the structure and statistics of grammar. See Manning & Schutze (1999)
and Jurafsky & Martin (2000) for early approaches.
Recurrent neural networks: Before the introduction of transformers, many state-of-the-art
NLP applications used recurrent neural networks, or RNNs for short (figure 12.19). The term
“recurrent” was introduced by Rumelhart et al. (1985), but the main idea dates to at least
Minsky & Papert (1969). RNNs ingest a sequence of inputs (words in NLP) one at a time.
At each step, the network receives both the new input and a hidden representation computed
from the previous time step (the recurrent connection). The final output contains information
about the whole input. This representation can then support NLP tasks like classification or
translation. They have also been used in a decoding context in which generated tokens are
fed back into the model to form the next input to the sequence. For example, the PixelRNN
(Van den Oord et al., 2016c) used RNNs to build an autoregressive model of images.
From RNNs to transformers: One of the problems with RNNs is that they can forget in-
formation that is further back in the sequence. More sophisticated versions of this architecture,
such as long short-term memory networks or LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997b) and
gated recurrent units or GRUs (Cho et al., 2014; Chung et al., 2014) partially addressed this
problem. However, in machine translation, the idea emerged that all of the intermediate rep-
resentations in the RNN could be exploited to produce the output sentence. Moreover, certain
output words should attend more to certain input words according to their relation (Bahdanau
et al., 2015). This ultimately led to dispensing with the recurrent structure and replacing it with
the encoder-decoder transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Here input tokens attend to one another
(self-attention), output tokens attend to those earlier in the sequence (masked self-attention),
and output tokens also attend to the input tokens (cross-attention). A formal algorithmic de-
scription of the transformer can be found in Phuong & Hutter (2022), and a survey of work can
be found in Lin et al. (2022). The literature should be approached with caution, as many en-
hancements to transformers do not make meaningful performance improvements when carefully
assessed in controlled experiments (Narang et al., 2021).


===== PDF 248 / книга 234 =====
234 12 Transformers
Applications: Models based on self-attention and/or the transformer architecture have been
applied to text sequences (Vaswani et al., 2017), image patches (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021),
protein sequences (Rives et al., 2021), graphs (Veličković et al., 2019), database schema (Xu
et al., 2021b), speech (Wang et al., 2020c), mathematical integration when formulated as a
translation problem (Lample & Charton, 2020), and time series (Wu et al., 2020b). However,
their most celebrated successes have been in building language models and, more recently, as a
replacement for convolutional networks in computer vision.
Large language models: Vaswani et al. (2017) targeted translation tasks, but transformers
are now more usually used to build either pure encoder or pure decoder models, the most famous
of which are BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and GPT2/GPT3 (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020), respectively. These models are usually tested against benchmarks like GLUE (Wang
et al., 2019b), which includes the SQuAD question-answering task (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)
described in section 12.6.2, SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019a) and BIG-bench (Srivastava et al.,
2022), which combine many NLP tasks to create an aggregate score for measuring language
ability. Decoder models are generally not fine-tuned for these tasks but can perform well anyway
when given a few examples of questions and answers and asked to complete the text from the
next question. This is referred to as few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020).
Since GPT3, many decoder language models have been released with steady improvement in
few-shot results. These include GLaM (Du et al., 2022), Gopher (Rae et al., 2021), Chinchilla
(Hoffmann et al., 2023), Megatron-Turing NLG (Smith et al., 2022), and LaMDa (Thoppilan
et al., 2022). Most of the performance improvement is attributable to increased model size,
using sparsely activated modules, and exploiting larger datasets. At the time of writing, the
most recent model is PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), which has 540 billion parameters and
was trained on 780 billion tokens across 6144 processors. Interestingly, since text is highly
compressible, this model has more than enough capacity to memorize the entire training dataset.
This is true for many language models. Many bold statements have been made about how large
language models exceed human performance. This is probably true for some tasks, but such
statements should be treated with caution (see Ribeiro et al.,2021; McCoy et al., 2019; Bowman
& Dahl, 2021; and Dehghani et al., 2021).
These models have considerable world knowledge. For example, in section 12.7.4, the model
knows key facts about deep learning, including that it is a type of machine learning with
associated algorithms and applications. Indeed, one such model has been mistakenly identified
as being sentient (Clark, 2022). However, there are persuasive arguments that the degree of
“understanding” this type of model can ever have is limited (Bender & Koller, 2020).
Tokenizers: Schuster & Nakajima (2012) and Sennrich et al. (2015) introduced WordPiece
and byte pair encoding (BPE), respectively. Both methods greedily merge pairs of tokens based
on their frequency of adjacency (figure 12.8), with the main difference being how the initial
tokens are chosen. For example, in BPE, the initial tokens are characters or punctuation with
a special token to denote whitespace. The merges cannot occur over the whitespace. As the
algorithm proceeds, new tokens are formed by combining characters recursively so that sub-
word and word tokens emerge. The unigram language model (Kudo, 2018) generates several
possible candidate merges and chooses the best one based on the likelihood in a language model.
Provilkov et al. (2020) develop BPE dropout, which generates the candidates more eﬀiciently
by introducing randomness into the process of counting frequencies. Versions of both byte pair
encoding and the unigram language model are included in the SentencePiece library (Kudo &
Richardson, 2018), which works directly on Unicode characters and can work with any language.
He et al. (2020) introduce a method that treats the sub-word segmentation as a latent variable
that should be marginalized out for learning and inference.
Decoding algorithms: Transformer decoder models take a body of text and return a prob-
ability over the next token. This is then added to the preceding text, and the model is run


===== PDF 249 / книга 235 =====
Notes 235
again. The process of choosing tokens from these probability distributions is known as decoding.
Näive ways to do this would be to either (i) greedily choose the most likely token or (ii) choose
a token randomly according to the distribution. However, neither of these methods works well
in practice. In the former case, the results may be very generic, and the latter case may lead
to degraded quality outputs (Holtzman et al., 2020). This is partly because, during training,
the model was only exposed to sequences of ground truth tokens (known as teacher forcing) but
sees its own output when deployed.
It is not computationally feasible to try every combination of tokens in the output sequence,
but it is possible to maintain a fixed number of parallel hypotheses and choose the most likely
overall sequence. This is known as beam search. Beam search tends to produce many similar
hypotheses and has been modified to investigate more diverse sequences (Vijayakumar et al.,
2016; Kulikov et al., 2018). One possible problem with random sampling is that there is a very
long tail of unlikely following words that collectively have a significant probability. This has
led to the development of top-K sampling, in which tokens are sampled from only the K most
likely hypotheses (Fan et al., 2018). Top-K sampling still sometimes allows unreasonable token
choices when there are only a few high-probability choices. To resolve this problem, Holtzman
et al. (2020) proposed nucleus sampling, in which tokens are sampled from a fixed proportion of
the total probability mass. El Asri & Prince (2020) discuss decoding algorithms in more depth.
Types of attention: Scaled dot-product attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) is just one of a
family of attention mechanisms that includes additive attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015), multi-
plicative attention (Luong et al., 2015), key-value attention (Daniluk et al., 2017), and memory-
compressed attention (Liu et al., 2019c). Zhai et al. (2021) constructed “attention-free” trans-
formers, in which the tokens interact in a way that does not have quadratic complexity. Multi-
head attention was also introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017). Interestingly, it appears that most
of the heads can be pruned after training without critically affecting the performance (Voita
et al., 2019); it has been suggested that their role is to guard against bad initializations. Hu et al.
(2018b) propose squeeze-and-excitation networks, attention-like mechanisms that re-weight the
channels in a convolutional layer based on globally computed features.
Relationship of self-attention to other models: The self-attention computation has close
connections to other models. First, it is an example of a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2017) in that
it uses one part of the network to choose the weights of another part: the attention matrix forms
the weights of a sparse network layer that maps the values to the outputs (figure 12.3). The
synthesizer (Tay et al., 2021) simplifies this idea by simply using a neural network to create each
row of the attention matrix from the corresponding input. Even though the input tokens no
longer interact with each other to create the attention weights, this works surprisingly well. Wu
et al. (2019) present a similar system that produces an attention matrix with a convolutional
structure so the tokens attend to their neighbors. The gated multi-layer perceptron (Wu et al.,
2019) computes a matrix that pointwise multiplies the values and hence modifies them without
mixing them. Transformers are also closely related to fast weight memory systems, which were
the intellectual forerunners of hypernetworks (Schlag et al., 2021).
Self-attention can also be thought of as a routing mechanism (figure 12.1), and from this view-
point, there is a connection to capsule networks (Sabour et al., 2017). These capture hierarchical
relations in images; lower network levels might detect facial parts (noses, mouths), which are
then combined (routed) in higher-level capsules that represent a face. However, capsule net-
works use routing by agreement. In self-attention, the inputs compete with each other for how
much they contribute to a given output (via the softmax operation). In capsule networks, the
outputs of the layer compete with each other for inputs from earlier layers. Once we consider
self-attention as a routing network, we can question whether making this routing dynamic (i.e.,
dependent on the data) is necessary. The random synthesizer (Tay et al., 2021) removed the de-
pendence of the attention matrix on the inputs entirely and either used predetermined random
values or learned values. This performed surprisingly well across a variety of tasks.


===== PDF 250 / книга 236 =====
236 12 Transformers
Multi-head self-attention also has close connections to graph neural networks (see chapter 13),
convolution (Cordonnier et al., 2020), recurrent neural networks (Choromanski et al., 2020),
and memory retrieval in Hopfield networks (Ramsauer et al., 2021). For more information on
the relationships between transformers and other models, consult Prince (2021a).
Positional encoding: The original transformer paper (Vaswani et al., 2017) experimented
with predefining the positional encoding matrix Π, and learning the positional encoding Π.
It might seem odd to add the positional encodings to the D × N data matrix X rather than
concatenate them. However, the data dimension D is usually greater than the number of
tokens N, so the positional encoding lies in a subspace. The word embeddings in X are learned,
so the system can theoretically keep the two components in orthogonal subspaces and retrieve
the positional encodings as required. The predefined embeddings chosen by Vaswani et al.
(2017) were a family of sinusoidal components with two attractive properties: (i) the relative
position of two embeddings is easy to recover using a linear operation and (ii) their dot product
generally decreased as the distance between positions increased (see Prince, 2021a, for more
details). Many systems, such as GPT3 and BERT, learn positional encodings. Wang et al.
(2020a) examined the cosine similarities of the positional encodings in these models and showed
that they generally decline with relative distance, although they also have a periodic component.
Much subsequent work has modified just the attention matrix so that in the scaled dot product
self-attention equation:
" #
Sa[X] = V · Softmax K√T Q , (12.16)
Dq
only the queries and keys contain position information:
V = βv1T + ΩvX
Q = βq1T + Ωq(X + Π)
K = βk1T + Ωk(X + Π). (12.17)
This has led to the idea of multiplying out the quadratic component in the numerator of equa-
tion 12.16 and retaining only some of the terms. For example, Ke et al. (2021) decouple or untie
the content and position information by retaining only the content-content and position-position
terms and using different projection matrices Ω• for each.
Another modification is to inject information directly about the relative position. This is more
important than absolute position since a batch of text can start at an arbitrary place in a
document. Shaw et al. (2018), Raffel et al. (2020), and Huang et al. (2020b) all developed
systems where a single term was learned for each relative position offset, and the attention
matrix was modified in various ways using these relative positional encodings. Wei et al. (2019)
investigated relative positional encodings based on predefined sinusoidal embeddings rather than
learned values. DeBERTa (He et al., 2021) combines these ideas; they retain only a subset of
terms from the quadratic expansion, apply different projection matrices to them, and use relative
positional encodings. Other work has explored sinusoidal embeddings that encode absolute and
relative position information in more complex ways (Su et al., 2021).
Wang et al. (2020a) compare the performance of transformers in BERT with different posi-
tional encodings. They found that relative positional encodings perform better than absolute
positional encodings, but there was little difference between using sinusoidal and learned em-
beddings. A survey of positional encodings can be found in Dufter et al. (2021).
Extending transformers to longer sequences: The complexity of the self-attention mech-
anism increases quadratically with the sequence length. Some tasks like summarization or


===== PDF 251 / книга 237 =====
Notes 237
question answering may require long inputs, so this quadratic dependence limits performance.
Three lines of work have attempted to address this problem. The first decreases the size of the
attention matrix, the second makes the attention sparse, and the third modifies the attention
mechanism to make it more eﬀicient.
To decrease the size of the attention matrix, Liu et al. (2018b) introduced memory-compressed
attention. This applies strided convolution to the keys and values, which reduces the number
of positions in a very similar way to downsampling in a convolutional network. Attention is
now applied between weighted combinations of neighboring positions, where the weights are
learned. Along similar lines, Wang et al. (2020b) observed that the quantities in the attention
mechanism are often low rank in practice and developed the LinFormer, which projects the keys
and values onto a smaller subspace before computing the attention matrix.
To make attention sparse, Liu et al. (2018b) proposed local attention, in which neighboring
blocks of tokens only attend to one another. This creates a block diagonal interaction matrix (see
figure 12.15). Information cannot pass from block to block, so such layers are typically alternated
with full attention. Along the same lines, GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) uses a convolutional
interaction matrix and alternates this with full attention. Child et al. (2019) and Beltagy et al.
(2020) experimented with various interaction matrices, including convolutional structures with
different dilation rates but allowing some queries to interact with every other key. Ainslie
et al. (2020) introduced the extended transformer construction (figure 12.15h), which uses a
set of global embeddings that interact with every other token. This can only be done in the
encoder version, or these implicitly allow the system to “look ahead.” When combined with
relative position encoding, this scheme requires special encodings for mapping to, from, and
between these global embeddings. BigBird (Ainslie et al., 2020) combined global embeddings
and a convolutional structure with a random sampling of possible connections. Other work
has investigated learning the sparsity pattern of the attention matrix (Roy et al., 2021; Kitaev
et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2020).
Finally, it has been noted that the terms in the numerator and denominator of the softmax oper-
ation that computes attention have the form exp[kT q]. This can be treated as a kernel function
and, as such, can be expressed as the dot product g[k]T g[q] where g[•] is a nonlinear transforma-
tion. This formulation decouples the queries and keys, making the attention computation more Problem 12.10
eﬀicient. Unfortunately, to replicate the form of the exponential terms, the transformation g[•]
must map the inputs to the infinite space. The linear transformer (Katharopoulos et al., 2020)
recognizes this and replaces the exponential term with a different similarity measure. The Per-
former (Choromanski et al., 2020) approximates this infinite mapping with a finite-dimensional
one. More details about extending transformers to longer sequences can be found in Tay et al.
(2023) and Prince (2021a).
Training transformers: Training transformers is challenging and requires both learning rate
warm-up (Goyal et al., 2018) and Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015). Indeed Xiong et al. (2020a) and
Huang et al. (2020a) show that the gradients vanish, and the Adam updates decrease in magni-
tude without learning rate warm-up. Several interacting factors cause this problem. Residual
connections cause the exploding gradients (figure 11.6), but normalization layers prevent this.
Vaswani et al. (2017) used LayerNorm rather than BatchNorm because NLP statistics are highly
variable between batches, although subsequent work has modified BatchNorm for transformers
(Shen et al., 2020a). The positioning of the LayerNorm outside of the residual block causes
gradients to shrink as they pass back through the network (Xiong et al., 2020a). In addition,
the relative weight of the residual connections and main self-attention mechanism varies as we
move through the network upon initialization (see figure 11.6c). There is the additional com-
plication that the gradients for the query and key parameters are smaller than for the value
parameters (Liu et al., 2020), which necessitates the use of Adam. These factors interact in a
complex way, making training unstable and necessitating learning rate warm-up.
There have been various attempts to stabilize training, including (i) a variation of FixUp called
TFixup (Huang et al., 2020a) that allows the LayerNorm components to be removed, (ii) chang-


===== PDF 252 / книга 238 =====
238 12 Transformers
ing the position of the LayerNorm components in the network (Liu et al., 2020), and (iii)
re-weighting the two paths in the residual branches (Liu et al., 2020; Bachlechner et al., 2021).
Xu et al. (2021b) introduced an initialization scheme called DTFixup that allows transformers
to be trained with smaller datasets. A detailed discussion can be found in Prince (2021b).
Applications in vision: ImageGPT (Chen et al., 2020a) and the Vision Transformer (Doso-
vitskiy et al., 2021) were both early transformer architectures applied to images. Transformers
have been used for image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021), object
detection (Carion et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020b; Fang et al., 2021), semantic segmentation (Ye
et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2022), super-resolution (Yang et al., 2020a), action
recognition (Sun et al., 2019; Girdhar et al., 2019), image generation (Chen et al., 2021b; Nash
et al., 2021), visual question answering (Su et al., 2019b; Tan & Bansal, 2019), inpainting (Wan
et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2020b; Li et al., 2022), colorization (Kumar et al.,
2021), and many other vision tasks (Khan et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023b).
Transformers and convolutional networks: Transformers have been combined with con-
volutional neural networks for many tasks, including image classification (Wu et al., 2020a),
object detection (Hu et al., 2018a; Carion et al., 2020), video processing (Wang et al., 2018c;
Sun et al., 2019), unsupervised object discovery (Locatello et al., 2020) and various text/vision
tasks (Chen et al., 2020d; Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019). Transformers can outperform convolu-
tional networks for vision tasks but usually require large quantities of data to achieve superior
performance. Often, they are pre-trained on enormous datasets like JRT (Sun et al., 2017)
and LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2021). The transformer doesn’t have the inductive bias of
convolutional networks, but by using huge amounts of data, it can surmount this disadvantage.
From pixels to video: Non-local networks (Wang et al., 2018c) were an early application of
self-attention to image data. Transformers were initially applied to pixels in local neighborhoods
(Parmar et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019; Parmar et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020a). ImageGPT (Chen
et al., 2020a) scaled this to model all pixels in a small image. The Vision Transformer (ViT)
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) used non-overlapping patches to analyze bigger images.
Since then, many multi-scale systems have been developed, including the SWin transformer
(Liu et al., 2021c), SWinV2 (Liu et al., 2022), multi-scale transformers (MViT) (Fan et al.,
2021), and pyramid vision transformers (Wang et al., 2021). The Crossformer (Wang et al.,
2022b) models interactions between spatial scales. Ali et al. (2021) introduced cross-covariance
image transformers, in which the channels rather than spatial positions attend to one another,
hence making the size of the attention matrix indifferent to the image size. The dual attention
vision transformer (DaViT) was developed by Ding et al. (2022) and alternates between local
spatial attention within sub-windows and spatially global attention between channels. Chu et al.
(2021) similarly alternate between local attention within sub-windows and global attention by
subsampling the spatial domain. Dong et al. (2022) adapt the ideas of figure 12.15, in which
the interactions between elements are sparsified to the 2D image domain.
Transformers were subsequently adapted to video processing (Arnab et al., 2021; Bertasius et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021c; Neimark et al., 2021; Patrick et al., 2021). A survey of transformers
applied to video can be found in Selva et al. (2022).
Combining images and text: CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) learns a joint encoder for images
and their captions using a contrastive pre-training task. The system ingests N images and
their captions and produces a matrix of compatibility between images and captions. The loss
function encourages the correct pairs to have a high score and the incorrect pairs to have a low
score. Ramesh et al. (2021) and Ramesh et al. (2022) train a diffusion decoder to invert the
CLIP image encoder for text-conditional image generation (see chapter 18).


===== PDF 253 / книга 239 =====
Notes 239
Problems
Problem 12.1 Consider a self-attention mechanism that processes N inputs of length D to
produce N outputs of the same size. How many weights and biases are used to compute the
queries, keys, and values? How many attention weights a[•, •] will there be? How many weights
and biases would there be in a fully connected network relating all DN inputs to all DN
outputs?
Problem 12.2 Why might we want to ensure that the input to the self-attention mechanism is
the same size as the output?
Problem 12.3∗ Show that the self-attention mechanism (equation 12.8) is equivariant to a
permutation XP of the data X, where P is a permutation matrix. In other words, show that:
Appendix B.4.4
Permutation
Sa[XP] = Sa[X]P. (12.18) matrix
Problem 12.4 Consider the softmax operation:
yi = softmaxi[z] = P 5 j e = x 1 p e [ x z p i] [zj] , (12.19)
C in o t m h p e u c t a e se th w e h 2 e 5 re d t e h ri e v r a e t a iv r e e s, fiv ∂ e yi i / n ∂ p z u j ts fo w r i a th ll v i, a j lu ∈ es { : 1 z , 1 2 = , 3, − 4 3 , , 5} z2 . = Wh 1, at z3 d = o y 1 o 0 u 0, c z o 4 nc = lu 5 d , e z ? 5 = −1.
Problem 12.5 Why is implementation more eﬀicient if the values, queries, and keys in each of
the H heads each have dimension D/H where D is the original dimension of the data?
Problem 12.6 BERT was pre-trained using two tasks. The first task requires the system to pre-
dict missing (masked) words. The second task requires the system to classify pairs of sentences
as being adjacent or not in the original text. Identify whether each of these tasks is generative
or contrastive (see section 9.3.6). Why do you think they used two tasks? Propose two novel
contrastive tasks that could be used to pre-train a language model.
Problem 12.7 Consider adding a new token to a precomputed masked self-attention mechanism
with N tokens. Describe the extra computation that must be done to incorporate this new
token.
Problem 12.8 Computation in vision transformers expands quadratically with the number of
patches. Devise two methods to reduce the computation using the principles from figure 12.15.
Problem 12.9 Consider representing an image with a grid of 16 × 16 patches, each represented
by a patch embedding of length 512. Compare the amount of computation required in the
DaViT transformer to perform attention (i) between the patches, using all of the channels, and
(ii) between the channels, using all of the patches.
Problem 12.10∗ Attention weights are usually computed as:
a[xm, xn] = softmaxm h kT• qn i = P N m′ e = x 1 p e (cid:2) x k p Tm(cid:2) k q Tm n (cid:3) ′qn) (cid:3). (12.20)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Consider replacing exp kTmqn with the dot product g[km]T g[qn] where g[•] is a nonlinear
transformation. Show how this makes the computation of the attention weights more eﬀicient.
