

===== PDF 254 / книга 240 =====
Chapter 13
Graph neural networks
Chapter 10 described convolutional networks, which specialize in processing regular ar-
rays of data (e.g., images). Chapter 12 described transformers, which specialize in pro-
cessing sequences of variable length (e.g., text). This chapter describes graph neural
networks. As the name suggests, these are neural architectures that process graphs (i.e.,
sets of nodes connected by edges).
There are three novel challenges associated with processing graphs. First, their topol-
ogy is variable, and it is hard to design networks that are both suﬀiciently expressive and
can cope with this variation. Second, graphs may be enormous; a graph representing
connections between users of a social network might have a billion nodes. Third, there
may only be a single monolithic graph available, so the usual protocol of training with
many data examples and testing with new data is not always appropriate.
This chapter starts by presenting real-world examples of graphs. It then describes
how to encode these graphs and how to formulate supervised learning problems for
graphs. The algorithmic requirements for processing graphs are discussed, and these lead
naturally to graph convolutional networks, a particular type of graph neural network.
13.1 What is a graph?
A graph is a very general structure and consists of a set of nodes or vertices, where pairs
of nodes are connected by edges or links. Graphs are typically sparse; only a small subset
of the possible edges are present.
Some objects in the real world naturally take the form of graphs. For example,
road networks can be considered graphs where the nodes are physical locations, and the
edges represent roads between them (figure 13.1a). Chemical molecules are small graphs
where the nodes represent atoms, and the edges represent chemical bonds (figure 13.1b).
Electrical circuits are graphs where the nodes represent components and junctions, and
the edges are electrical connections (figure 13.1c).
Furthermore, many datasets can also be represented by graphs, even if this is not
their obvious surface form. For example:


===== PDF 255 / книга 241 =====
13.1 What is a graph? 241
Figure 13.1 Real-world graphs. Some objects, such as a) road networks, b)
molecules, and c) electrical circuits, are naturally structured as graphs.
• Social networks are graphs where nodes are people, and the edges represent friend-
ships between them.
• The scientific literature can be viewed as a graph where the nodes are papers, and
the edges represent citations.
• Wikipedia can be considered a graph where the nodes are articles, and the edges
represent hyperlinks between articles.
• Computer programs can be represented as graphs where the nodes are syntax
tokens (variables at different points in the program flow), and the edges represent
computations involving these variables.
• Geometric point clouds can be represented as graphs. Here, each point is a node
with edges connecting to other nearby points.
• Protein interactions in a cell can be expressed as graphs, where the nodes are the
proteins, and there is an edge between two proteins if they interact.
In addition, a set (an unordered list) can be treated as a graph in which every member
is a node and connects to every other. An image can be treated as a graph with regular
topology, in which each pixel is a node with edges to the adjacent pixels.
13.1.1 Types of graphs
Graphs can be categorized in various ways. The social network in figure 13.2a contains
undirected edges; each pair of individuals with a connection between them have mutually
agreed to be friends, so there is no sense that the relationship is directional. In contrast,
the citation network in figure 13.2b contains directed edges. Each paper cites other
papers, and this relationship is inherently one-way.
Figure 13.2c depicts a knowledge graph that encodes a set of facts about objects by
defining relations between them. Technically, this is a directed heterogeneous multigraph.
It is heterogeneous because the nodes can represent different types of entities (e.g., people,
countries, companies). It is a multigraph because there can be multiple edges of different
types between any two nodes.


===== PDF 256 / книга 242 =====
242 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.2 Types of graphs. a) A social network is an undirected graph; the
connections between people are symmetric. b) A citation network is a directed
graph; one publication cites another, so the relationship is asymmetric. c) A
knowledge graph is a directed heterogeneous multigraph. The nodes are hetero-
geneous in that they represent different object types (people, places, companies)
and multiple edges may represent different relations between each node. d) A
point set can be converted to a graph by forming edges between nearby points.
Each node has an associated position in 3D space, and this is termed a geometric
graph (adapted from Hu et al., 2022). e) The scene on the left can be represented
by a hierarchical graph. The topology of the room, table, and light are all repre-
sented by graphs. These graphs form nodes in a larger graph representing object
adjacency (adapted from Fernández-Madrigal & González, 2002).


===== PDF 257 / книга 243 =====
13.2 Graph representation 243
Figure 13.3 Graph representation. a) Example graph with six nodes and seven
edges. Each node has an associated embedding of length five (brown vectors).
Each edge has an associated embedding of length four (blue vectors). This graph
can be represented by three matrices. b) The adjacency matrix is a binary matrix
where element (m, n) is set to one if node m connects to node n. c) The node
data matrix X contains the concatenated node embeddings. d) The edge data
matrix E contains the edge embeddings.
The point set representing the airplane in figure 13.2d can be converted into a graph
by connecting each point to its K nearest neighbors. The result is a geometric graph
where each point is associated with a position in 3D space. Figure 13.2e represents a
hierarchical graph. The table, light, and room are each described by graphs representing
the adjacency of their respective components. These three graphs are themselves nodes
in another graph that represents the topology of the objects in a larger model.
All types of graphs can be processed using deep learning. However, this chapter
focuses on undirected graphs like the social network in figure 13.2a.
13.2 Graph representation
In addition to the graph structure itself, information is typically associated with each
node. For example, in a social network, each individual might be characterized by a fixed-
length vector representing their interests. Sometimes, the edges also have information
attached. For example, in the road network example, each edge might be characterized
by its length, number of lanes, frequency of accidents, and speed limit. The information
at a node is stored in a node embedding, and the information at an edge is stored in an
edge embedding.
More formally, a graph consists of a set of N nodes connected by a set of E edges. The
graph can be encoded by three matrices A, X, and E, representing the graph structure,
node embeddings, and edge embeddings, respectively (figure 13.3).


===== PDF 258 / книга 244 =====
244 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.4 Properties of the adjacency matrix. a) Example graph. b) Posi-
tion (m, n) of the adjacency matrix A contains the number of walks of length one
from node m to node n. c) Position (m, n) of the squared adjacency matrix A2
contains the number of walks of length two from node n to node m. d) One hot
vector representing node six, which was highlighted in panel (a). e) When we
pre-multiply this vector by A, the result contains the number of walks of length
one from node six to each node; we can reach nodes five, seven, and eight in one
move. f) When we pre-multiply this vector by A2, the resulting vector contains
the number of walks of length two from node six to each node; we can reach nodes
two, three, four, five, and eight in two moves, and we can return to the original
node in three different ways (via nodes five, seven, and eight).
The graph structure is represented by the adjacency matrix, A. This is an N × N
matrix where entry (m, n) is set to one if there is an edge between nodes m and n and
Problems 13.1–13.2 zero otherwise. For undirected graphs, this matrix is always symmetric. For large sparse
graphs, it can be stored as a list of connections (m, n) to save memory.
The nth node has an associated node embedding x(n) of length D. These embeddings
are concatenated and stored in the D×N node data matrix X. Similarly, the eth edge has
an associated edge embedding e(e) of length DE. These edge embeddings are collected
into the DE × E matrix E. For simplicity, we initially consider graphs that only have
node embeddings and return to edge embeddings in section 13.9.
13.2.1 Properties of the adjacency matrix
The adjacency matrix can be used to find the neighbors of a node using linear algebra.
Consider encoding the nth node as a one-hot column vector (a vector with only one
non-zero entry at position n, which is set to one). When we pre-multiply this vector by
the adjacency matrix, it extracts the nth column of the adjacency matrix and returns a
vector with ones at the positions of the neighbors (i.e., all the places we can reach in a


===== PDF 259 / книга 245 =====
13.3 Graph neural networks, tasks, and loss functions 245
walk of length one from the nth node). If we repeat this procedure (i.e., pre-multiply
by A again), the resulting vector contains the number of walks of length two from node n
to every node (figures 13.4d–f). Problems 13.3–13.4
In general, if we raise the adjacency matrix to the power of L, the entry at posi-
tion (m, n) of AL contains the number of unique walks of length L from node n to
node m (figures 13.4a–c). This is not the same as the number of unique paths since it No E te n b c o o o d k in 1 g 3.1
includes routes that visit the same node more than once. Nonetheless, AL still contains graphs
valuable information about the graph connectivity; a non-zero entry at position (m, n)
indicates that the distance from m to n must be less than or equal to L.
13.2.2 Permutation of node indices
Node indexing in graphs is arbitrary; permuting the node indices results in a permu-
tation of the columns of the node data matrix X and a permutation of both the rows
and columns of the adjacency matrix A. However, the underlying graph is unchanged
(figure 13.5). This is in contrast to images, where permuting the pixels creates a different
image, and to text, where permuting the words creates a different sentence.
The operation of exchanging node indices can be expressed mathematically by a
permutation matrix, P. This is a matrix where exactly one entry in each row and
column take the value one, and the remaining values are zero. When position (m, n) of
the permutation matrix is set to one, it indicates that node m will become node n after
the permutation. To map from one indexing to another, we use the operations: Problem 13.5
X′ = XP
A′ = PT AP, (13.1)
where post-multiplying by P permutes the columns and pre-multiplying by PT permutes
the rows. It follows that any processing applied to the graph should also be indifferent
to these permutations. Otherwise, the result will depend on the choice of node indices.
13.3 Graph neural networks, tasks, and loss functions
A graph neural network is a model that takes the node embeddings X and the adjacency
matrix A as inputs and passes them through a series of K layers. The node embeddings
are updated at each layer to create intermediate “hidden” representations Hk before
finally computing output embeddings HK.
At the start of this network, each column of the input node embeddings X just con-
tains information about the node itself. At the end, each column of the model output HK
includes information about the node and its context within the graph. This is similar to
word embeddings passing through a transformer network. These represent words at the
start, but represent the word meanings in the context of the sentence at the end.


===== PDF 260 / книга 246 =====
246 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.5 Permutation of node indices. a) Example graph, b) associated adja-
cency matrix and c) node embeddings. d) The same graph where the (arbitrary)
order of the indices has been changed. e) The adjacency matrix and f) node
matrix are now different. Consequently, any network layer that operates on the
graph should be indifferent to the ordering of the nodes.
13.3.1 Tasks and loss functions
We defer discussion of graph neural network models until section 13.4 and first describe
the types of problems these networks tackle and their associated loss functions. Super-
vised graph problems usually fall into one of three categories (figure 13.6).
Graph-level tasks: The network assigns a label or estimates one or more values from
the entire graph, exploiting both the structure and node embeddings. For example, we
might want to predict the temperature at which a molecule becomes liquid (a regression
task) or whether a molecule is poisonous to human beings or not (a classification task).
For graph-level tasks, the output node embeddings are combined (e.g., by averaging),
and the resulting vector is mapped via a linear transformation or neural network to a
fixed-size vector. For regression, the mismatch between the result and the ground truth
values is computed using the least squares loss. For binary classification, the output
is passed through a sigmoid function, and the mismatch is calculated using the binary
cross-entropy loss. Here, the probability that the graph belongs to class one might be
given by:
P r(y = 1|X, A) = sig [βK + ωKHK1/N] , (13.2)
where the scalar βK and 1 × D vector ωK are learned parameters. Post-multiplying the
output embedding matrix HK by the column vector 1 that contains ones has the effect
of summing together all the embeddings and subsequently dividing by the number of
nodes N computes the average. This is known as mean pooling (see figure 10.11).


===== PDF 261 / книга 247 =====
13.3 Graph neural networks, tasks, and loss functions 247
Figure 13.6 Common tasks for graphs. In each case, the input is a graph repre-
sented by its adjacency matrix and node embeddings. The graph neural network
processes the node embeddings by passing them through a series of layers. The
node embeddings at the last layer contain information about both the node and
its context in the graph. a) Graph classification. The node embeddings are com-
bined (e.g., by averaging) and then mapped to a fixed-size vector that is passed
through a softmax function to produce class probabilities. b) Node classification.
Each node embedding is used individually as the basis for classification (cyan
and orange colors represent assigned node classes). c) Edge prediction. Node
embeddings adjacent to the edge are combined (e.g., by taking the dot product)
to compute a single number that is mapped via a sigmoid function to produce a
probability that a missing edge should be present.


===== PDF 262 / книга 248 =====
248 13 Graph neural networks
Node-level tasks: The network assigns a label (classification) or one or more values
(regression) to each node of the graph, using both the graph structure and node em-
beddings. For example, given a graph constructed from a 3D point cloud similar to
figure 13.2d, the goal might be to classify the nodes according to whether they belong
to the wings or fuselage. Loss functions are defined in the same way as for graph-level
tasks, except that now this is done independently at each node n:
h i
P r(y(n) = 1|X, A) = sig βK + ωKh( K n) . (13.3)
Edge prediction tasks: The network predicts whether or not there should be an edge
between nodes n and m. For example, in the social network setting, the network might
predict whether two people know and like each other and suggest that they connect if
that is the case. This is a binary classification task where the two node embeddings must
be mapped to a single number representing the probability that the edge is present. One
possibility is to take the dot product of the node embeddings and pass the result through
a sigmoid function to create the probability:
h i
P r(y(mn) = 1|X, A) = sig h(m)T h(n) . (13.4)
13.4 Graph convolutional networks
There are many types of graph neural networks, but here we focus on spatial-based
convolutional graph neural networks, or GCNs for short. These models are convolutional
in that they update each node by aggregating information from nearby nodes. As such,
they induce a relational inductive bias (i.e., a bias toward prioritizing information from
neighbors). They are spatial-based because they use the original graph structure. This
contrasts with spectral-based methods, which apply convolutions in the Fourier domain.
Each layer of the GCN is a function F[•] with parameters Φ that takes the node
embeddings and adjacency matrix and outputs new node embeddings. The network can
hence be written as:
H1 = F[X, A, ϕ0]
H2 = F[H1, A, ϕ1]
H3 = F[H2, A, ϕ2]
...
=
...
HK = F[HK−1, A, ϕK−1], (13.5)
where X is the input, A is the adjacency matrix, Hk contains the modified node em-
beddings at the kth layer, and ϕk denotes the parameters that map from layer k to
layer k+1.


===== PDF 263 / книга 249 =====
13.4 Graph convolutional networks 249
13.4.1 Equivariance and invariance
We noted before that the indexing of the nodes in the graph is arbitrary, and any
permutation of the node indices does not change the graph. It is hence imperative that
any model respects this property. It follows that each layer must be equivariant (see
section 10.1) with respect to permutations of the node indices. In other words, if we
permute the node indices, the node embeddings at each stage will be permuted in the
same way. In mathematical terms, if P is a permutation matrix, then we must have:
Hk+1P = F[HkP, PT AP, ϕk]. (13.6)
For node classification and edge prediction tasks, the output should also be equiv-
ariant with respect to permutations of the node indices. However, for graph-level tasks,
the final layer aggregates information from across the graph, so the output is invariant
to the node order. In fact, the output layer from equation 13.2 achieves this because: Problem 13.6
y = sig [βK + ωKHK1/N] = sig [βK + ωKHKP1/N] , (13.7)
for any permutation matrix P (see problem 13.6).
This mirrors the case for images, where segmentation should be equivariant to geo-
metric transformations, and image classification should be invariant (figure 10.1). Here,
convolutional and pooling layers partially achieve this with respect to translations, but
there is no known way to guarantee these properties exactly for more general transfor-
mations. However, for graphs, it is possible to define networks that ensure equivariance
or invariance to permutations.
13.4.2 Parameter sharing
Chapter 10 argued applying fully connected networks to images isn’t sensible because
this requires the network to learn how to recognize an object separately at every image
position. Instead, we used convolutional layers that processed every position in the image
identically. This reduced the number of parameters and introduced an inductive bias
that forced the model to treat every part of the image in the same way.
The same argument can be made about nodes in a graph. We could learn a model
with separate parameters associated with each node. However, now the network must
independently learn the meaning of the connections in the graph at each position, and
training would require many graphs with the same topology. Instead, we build a model
that uses the same parameters at every node, reducing the number of parameters and
sharing what the network learns at each node across the entire graph.
Recall that a convolution (equation 10.3) updates a variable by taking a weighted
sum of information from its neighbors. One way to think of this is that each neighbor
sends a message to the variable of interest, which aggregates these messages to form the
update. When we considered images, the neighbors were pixels from a fixed-size square
region around the current position, so the spatial relationships at each position are the
same. However, in a graph, each node may have a different number of neighbors, and
there are no consistent relationships; there is no sense that we can weight information


===== PDF 264 / книга 250 =====
250 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.7 Simple Graph CNN layer. a) Input graph consists of structure (em-
bodied in graph adjacency matrix A, not shown) and node embeddings (stored
in columns of X). b) Each node in the first hidden layer is updated by (i) ag-
gregating the neighboring nodes to form a single vector, (ii) applying a linear
transformation Ω0 to the aggregated nodes, (iii) applying the same linear trans-
f a o n r d m fi a n ti a o l n ly Ω (v 0 ) t a o pp th ly e in o g ri a gi n n o a n l l n in o e d a e r , a ( c i t v i ) va a t d io d n in f g un t c h t e i s o e n t a o [ g • e ] t l h ik e e r a w R ith eL a U. b c ia ) s T β h0is ,
process is repeated at subsequent layers (but with different parameters for each
layer) until we produce the final embeddings at the end of the network.
from a node that is “above” the node of interest differently to information from a node
that is “below” it.
13.4.3 Example GCN layer
These considerations lead to a simple GCN layer (figure 13.7). At each node n in layer k,
we aggregate information from neighboring nodes by summing their node embeddings h•:
X
agg[n, k] = h( k m), (13.8)
m∈ne[n]
where ne[n] returns the set of indices of the neighbors of node n. Then we apply a
linear transformation Ωk to the embedding h( k n) at the current node and to this ag-
f g u r n eg c a ti t o e n d a v [ a • l ] u , e w , h a i d c d h a is b a i p a p s li t e e d rm in β de k p , e a n n d d en p t a ly ss t t o h e e v r e e r s y u m lt e t m hr b o e u r g o h f a its no v n ec li t n o e r a a r r a g c u t m iv e a n ti t o : n
h i
h( k n + ) 1 = a βk + Ωk · h( k n) + Ωk · agg[n, k] . (13.9)
We can write this more succinctly by noting that post-multiplication of a matrix
by a vector returns a weighted sum of its columns. The nth column of the adjacency
matrix A contains ones at the positions of the neighbors. Hence, if we collect the node


===== PDF 265 / книга 251 =====
13.5 Example: graph classification 251
embeddings into the D × N matrix Hk and post-multiply by the adjacency matrix A,
the nth column of the result is agg[n, k]. The update for the nodes is now:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Hk+1 = a
(cid:2)
βk1T + ΩkHk + ΩkH (cid:3)kA
= a βk1T + ΩkHk(A + I) , (13.10)
where 1 is an N ×1 vector containing ones. Here, the nonlinear activation function a[•]
is applied independently to every member of its matrix argument.
This layer satisfies the design considerations: it is equivariant to permutations of the
node indices, can cope with any number of neighbors, exploits the graph structure to Problem 13.7
provide a relational inductive bias, and shares parameters throughout the graph.
13.5 Example: graph classification
We now combine these ideas to describe a network that classifies molecules as toxic or
harmless. The network inputs are the adjacency matrix and node embedding matrix X.
T of h t e he ad n j o ac d e e n e c m y b m ed at d r i i n x g A ma ∈ tr R ix N X ×N ∈ d R e 1 r 1 iv 8× es N fr a o r m e o t n h e e -h m o o t le v c e u ct la o r rs st in ru d c ic t a u t r i e n . g T w h h e ic c h ol o u f m th n e s Gr N ap o h te c b l o as o s k ifi 1 c 3 a . t 2 ion
118 elements of the periodic table are present. In other words, they are vectors of length
118 where every position is zero except for the position corresponding to the relevant
element, which is set to one. The node embeddings can be transformed to an arbitrary
size D by the first weight matrix Ω0 ∈ RD×118.
The network equations are:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
H1 = a
(cid:2)
β01T + Ω0X(A + I)
(cid:3)
H2 = a β11T + Ω1H1(A + I)
...
=
...
(cid:2) (cid:3)
HK = a βK−11T + ΩK−1Hk−1(A + I)
f[X, A, Φ] = sig [βK + ωKHK1/N] , (13.11)
where the network output f[X, A, Φ] is a single value that determines the probability
that the molecule is toxic (see equation 13.2).
13.5.1 Training with batches
Given I training graphs {Xi, Ai} and their labels yi, the parameters Φ = {βK, ΩK}K k=0
can be learned using SGD and the binary cross-entropy loss (equation 5.19). Fully
connected networks, convolutional networks, and transformers all exploit the parallelism
of modern hardware to process an entire batch of training examples concurrently. To this
end, the batch elements are concatenated into a higher-dimensional tensor (section 7.4.2).


===== PDF 266 / книга 252 =====
252 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.8 Inductive vs. transductive problems. a) Node classification task in the
inductive setting. We are given a set of I training graphs, where the node labels
(orange and cyan colors) are known. After training, we are given a test graph
and must assign labels to each node. b) Node classification in the transductive
setting. There is one large graph in which some nodes have labels (orange and
cyan colors), and others are unknown. We train the model to predict the known
labels correctly and then examine the predictions at the unknown nodes.
However, each graph may have a different number of nodes. Hence, the matrices Xi
and Ai have different sizes, and there is no way to concatenate them into 3D tensors.
Luckily, a simple trick allows us to process the whole batch in parallel. The graphs
in the batch are treated as disjoint components of a single large graph. The network can
then be run as a single instance of the network equations. The mean pooling is carried
out only over the individual graphs to make a single representation per graph that can
be fed into the loss function.
13.6 Inductive vs. transductive models
Until this point, all of the models in this book have been inductive: we exploit a training
set of labeled data to learn the relation between the inputs and outputs. Then we apply
this to new test data. One way to think of this is that we are learning the rule that maps
inputs to outputs and then applying it elsewhere.
By contrast, a transductive model considers both the labeled and unlabeled data


===== PDF 267 / книга 253 =====
13.7 Example: node classification 253
at the same time. It does not produce a rule but merely a labeling for the unknown
outputs. This is sometimes termed semi-supervised learning. It has the advantage that
it can use patterns in the unlabeled data to help make its decisions. However, it has the
disadvantage that the model needs to be retrained when extra unlabeled data are added.
Both problem types are commonly encountered for graphs (figure 13.8). Sometimes,
we have many labeled graphs and learn a mapping between the graph and the labels.
For example, we might have many molecules, each labeled according to whether it is
toxic to humans. We learn the rule that maps the graph to the toxic/non-toxic label and
then apply this rule to new molecules. However, sometimes there is a single monolithic
graph. In the graph of scientific paper citations, we might have labels indicating the field
(physics, biology, etc.) for some nodes and wish to label the remaining nodes. Here, the
training and test data are irrevocably connected.
Graph-level tasks only occur in the inductive setting where there are training and test
graphs. However, node-level tasks and edge prediction tasks can occur in either setting.
In the transductive case, the loss function minimizes the mismatch between the model
output and the ground truth where this is known. New predictions are computed by
running the forward pass and retrieving the results where the ground truth is unknown.
13.7 Example: node classification
As a second example, consider a binary node classification task in a transductive setting.
We start with a commercial-sized graph with millions of nodes. Some nodes have ground
truth binary labels, and the goal is to label the remaining unlabeled nodes. The body
of the network will be the same as in the previous example (equation 13.11) but with a
different final layer that produces an output vector of size 1 × N:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
f[X, A, Φ] = sig βK1T + ωKHK , (13.12)
where the function sig[•] applies the sigmoid function independently to every element
of the row vector input. As usual, we use the binary cross-entropy loss, but now only
at nodes where we know the ground truth label y. Note that equation 13.12 is just a
vectorized version of the node classification loss from equation 13.3.
Training this network raises two problems. First, it is logistically diﬀicult to train a
graph neural network of this size. Consider that we must store the node embeddings at
every network layer in the forward pass. This will involve both storing and processing
a structure several times the size of the entire graph, and this may not be practical.
Second, we have only a single graph, so it’s not obvious how to perform stochastic
gradient descent. How can we form a batch if there is only a single object?
13.7.1 Choosing batches
One way to form a batch is to choose a random subset of labeled nodes at each training
step. Each node depends on its neighbors in the previous layer. These, in turn, depend


===== PDF 268 / книга 254 =====
254 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.9 Receptive fields in graph neural networks. Consider the orange node
in hidden layer two (right). This receives input from the nodes in the 1-hop
neighborhood in hidden layer one (shaded region in center). These nodes in
hidden layer one receive inputs from their neighbors in turn, and the orange node
in layer two receives inputs from all the input nodes in the 2-hop neighborhood
(shaded area on left). The region of the graph that contributes to a given node
is equivalent to the notion of a receptive field in convolutional neural networks.
on their neighbors in the layer before, so each node has the equivalent of a receptive field
(figure 13.9). The size of the receptive field is termed the k-hop neighborhood. We can
hence perform a gradient descent step using the graph that forms the union of the k-hop
neighborhoods of the batch nodes; the remaining inputs do not contribute.
Unfortunately, if there are many layers and the graph is densely connected, every
input node may be in the receptive field of every output, and this may not reduce the
graph size at all. This is known as the graph expansion problem. Two approaches that
tackle this problem are neighborhood sampling and graph partitioning.
Neighborhood sampling: The full graph that feeds into the batch of nodes is sampled,
thereby reducing the connections at each network layer (figure 13.10). For example, we
might start with the batch nodes and randomly sample a fixed number of their neighbors
N N o e t ig e h b b o o o r k h 1 o 3 o . d 3 in the previous layer. Then, we randomly sample a fixed number of their neighbors in
sampling the layer before, and so on. The graph still increases in size with each layer but in
a much more controlled way. This is done anew for each batch, so the contributing
neighbors differ even if the same batch is drawn twice. This is also reminiscent of
dropout (section 9.3.3) and adds some regularization.
Graph partitioning: A second approach is to cluster the original graph into disjoint
subsets of nodes (i.e., smaller graphs that are not connected to one another) before
processing (figure 13.11). There are standard algorithms to choose these subsets to
maximize the number of internal links. These smaller graphs can each be treated as
batches, or a random subset of them can be combined to form a batch (reinstating any
edges between them from the original graph).
Given one of the above methods to form batches, we can now train the network
parameters in the same way as for the inductive setting, dividing the labeled nodes into


===== PDF 269 / книга 255 =====
13.7 Example: node classification 255
Figure 13.10 Neighborhood sampling. a) One way of forming batches on large
graphs is to choose a subset of labeled nodes in the output layer (here, just one
node in layer two, right) and then working back to find all of the nodes in the K-
hop neighborhood (receptive field). Only this sub-graph is needed to train this
batch. Unfortunately, if the graph is densely connected, this may retain a large
proportion of the graph. b) One solution is neighborhood sampling. As we work
back from the final layer, we select a subset of neighbors (here, three) in the
layer before and a subset of the neighbors of these in the layer before that. This
restricts the size of the graph for training the batch. In all panels, the brightness
represents the distance from the original node.


===== PDF 270 / книга 256 =====
256 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.11 Graph partitioning. a) Input graph. b) The input graph is parti-
tioned into smaller subgraphs using a principled method that removes the fewest
edges. c-d) We can now use these subgraphs as batches to train in a transductive
setting, so here, there are four possible batches. e) Alternatively, we can use
combinations of the subgraphs as batches, reinstating the edges between them.
If we use pairs of subgraphs, there would be six possible batches here.
train, test, and validation sets as desired; we have effectively converted a transductive
problem to an inductive one. To perform inference, we compute predictions for the
unknown nodes based on their k-hop neighborhood. Unlike training, this does not require
storing the intermediate representations, so it is much more memory eﬀicient.
13.8 Layers for graph convolutional networks
In the previous examples, we combined messages from adjacent nodes by summing them
together with the transformed current node. This was accomplished by post-multiplying
the node embedding matrix H by the adjacency matrix plus the identity A + I. We now
consider different approaches to both (i) the combination of the current embedding with
the aggregated neighbors and (ii) the aggregation process itself.
13.8.1 Combining current node and aggregated neighbors
In the example GCN layer above, we combined the aggregated neighbors HA with the
current nodes H by just summing them:


===== PDF 271 / книга 257 =====
13.8 Layers for graph convolutional networks 257
h i
Hk+1 = a βk1T + ΩkHk(A + I) . (13.13)
In another variation, the current node is multiplied by a factor of (1 + ϵk) before con-
tributing to the sum, where ϵk is a learned scalar that is different for each layer:
h i
Hk+1 = a βk1T + ΩkHk(A + (1 + ϵk)I) . (13.14)
This is known as diagonal enhancement. A related variation applies a different linear
transform Ψk to the current node:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Hk+1
=
=
a
a
(cid:20)
(cid:20)β
β
k
k
1
1
T
T
+
+
Ω
(cid:2) Ω
kH
k (cid:20)
kA
Ψk
+
(cid:3) (cid:21)
Ψ(cid:20)
(cid:21) H
k
H
H
k k A
k(cid:21)(cid:21)
= a βk1T + Ω′ k H H kA k , (13.15)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
where we have defined Ω′ k = Ωk Ψk in the third line.
13.8.2 Residual connections
With residual connections, the aggregated representation from the neighbors is trans-
formed and passed through the activation function before summation or concatenation
with the current node. For the latter case, the associated network equations are:
(cid:20) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:21)
Hk+1 =
a βk1T
H
+
k
ΩkHkA
. (13.16)
13.8.3 Mean aggregation
The above methods aggregate the neighbors by summing the node embeddings. However,
it’s possible to combine the embeddings in different ways. Sometimes it’s better to take
the average of the neighbors rather than the sum; this can be superior if the embedding
information is more important and the structural information less so since the magnitude
of the neighborhood contributions will not depend on the number of neighbors:
1 X
agg[n] = |ne[n]|
m∈ne[n]
hm, (13.17)
where as before, ne[n] denotes a set containing the indices of the neighbors of the nth
node. Equation 13.17 can be computed neatly in matrix form by introducing the diago-
nal N × N degree matrix D. Each non-zero element of this matrix contains the number
of neighbors for the associated node. It follows that each diagonal element in the inverse Problem 13.8


===== PDF 272 / книга 258 =====
258 13 Graph neural networks
matrix D−1 contains the denominator that we need to compute the average. The new
GCN layer can be written as:
h i
Hk+1 = a βk1T + ΩkHk(AD−1 + I) . (13.18)
13.8.4 Kipf normalization
There are many variations of graph neural networks based on mean aggregation. Some-
times the current node is included with its neighbors in the mean computation rather
than treated separately. In Kipf normalization, the sum of the node representations is
Problem 13.9 normalized as:
agg[n] = X p hm , (13.19)
m∈ne[n]
|ne[n]||ne[m]|
with the logic that information coming from nodes with a very large number of neighbors
should be down-weighted since there are many connections and they provide less unique
information. This can also be expressed in matrix form using the degree matrix:
h i
Hk+1 = a βk1T + ΩkHk(D−1/2AD−1/2 + I) . (13.20)
13.8.5 Max pooling aggregation
An alternative operation that is also invariant to permutation is computing the maximum
of a set of objects. The max pooling aggregation operator is:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
agg[n] =
m
m
∈n
a
e
x
[n]
hm , (13.21)
where the operator max[•] returns the element-wise maximum of the vectors hm that
are neighbors to the current node n.
13.8.6 Aggregation by attention
The aggregation methods discussed so far either weight the contribution of the neighbors
equally or in a way that depends on the graph topology. Conversely, in graph attention
layers, the weights depend on the data at the nodes. A linear transform is applied to
the current node embeddings so that:
H′ k = βk1T + ΩkH. (13.22)
T no h d e e n e t m he be s d im di i n la g ri h ty ′ n i s s m c n om of pu ea te c d h b tr y a c n o s n fo c r a m te e n d at n i o n d g e th e e m p b a e i d r d s, in t g ak h in ′ m g t a o d t o h t e p t r r o a d n u s c fo t r w m i e t d h
a column vector ϕk of learned parameters, and applying an activation function:


===== PDF 273 / книга 259 =====
13.8 Layers for graph convolutional networks 259
Figure 13.12 Comparison of graph convolutional network, dot product attention,
and graph attention network. In each case, the mechanism maps N embeddings
of size D stored in a D × N matrix X to an output of the same size. a) The
graph convolutional network applies a linear transformation X′ = ΩX to the
data matrix. It then computes a weighted sum of the transformed data, where
the weighting is based on the adjacency matrix. A bias β is added, and the result
is passed through an activation function. b) The outputs of the self-attention
mechanism are also weighted sums of the transformed inputs, but this time the
weights depend on the data itself via the attention matrix. c) The graph attention
network combines both of these mechanisms; the weights are both computed from
the data and based on the adjacency matrix.


===== PDF 274 / книга 260 =====
260 13 Graph neural networks
(cid:20) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:21)
smn = a ϕT k h h ′ m′ n . (13.23)
These variables are stored in an N × N matrix S, where each element represents the
similarity of every node to every other. As in dot-product self-attention, the attention
weights contributing to each output embedding are normalized to be positive and sum
to one using the softmax operation. However, only those values corresponding to the
current node and its neighbors should contribute. The attention weights are applied to
the transformed embeddings:
h i
Hk+1 = a H′ k · Softmask[S, A + I] , (13.24)
where a[•] is a second activation function. The function Softmask[•, •] computes the
attention values by applying softmax operation separately to each column of its first
argument S, but only after setting values where the second argument A + I is zero to
negative infinity, so they do not contribute. This ensures that the attention to non-
neighboring nodes is zero.
This is very similar to the self-attention computation in transformers (see figure 13.12),
Note G b r o a o p k h 13.4 except that (i) The keys, queries, and values are all the same, (ii) The measure of simi-
attention larity is different, and (iii) The attentions are masked so that each node only attends to
itself and its neighbors. As in transformers, this system can be extended to use multiple
Problem 13.10 heads that are run in parallel and recombined.
13.9 Edge graphs
Until now, we have focused on processing node embeddings. These evolve as they are
passed through the network so that by the end of the network, they represent both the
node and its context in the graph. We now consider the case where the information is
associated with the edges of the graph.
It is easy to adapt the machinery for node embeddings to process edge embeddings
using the edge graph (also known as the adjoint graph or line graph). This is a com-
plementary graph, in which each edge in the original graph becomes a node, and every
two edges with a common node in the original graph create an edge in the new graph
(figure 13.13). In general, a graph can be recovered from its edge graph, so it’s possible
to swap between these two representations.
Problems 13.11–13.13 To process edge embeddings, the graph is translated to its edge graph. Then we
use exactly the same techniques, aggregating information at each new node from its
neighbors and combining this with the current representation. When both node and
edge embeddings are present, we can translate back and forth between the two graphs.
Now there are four possible updates (nodes update nodes, nodes update edges, edges
update nodes, and edges update edges), and these can be alternated as desired, or with
Problem 13.14 minor modifications, nodes can be updated simultaneously from both nodes and edges.


===== PDF 275 / книга 261 =====
13.10 Summary 261
Figure 13.13 Edge graph. a) Graph with six nodes. b) To create the edge graph,
we assign one node for each original edge (cyan circles), and c) connect the new
nodes if the edges they represent connect to the same node in the original graph.
13.10 Summary
Graphs consist of a set of nodes, where pairs of these nodes are connected by edges. Both
nodes and edges can have data attached, and these are referred to as node embeddings
and edge embeddings, respectively. Many real-world problems can be framed in terms of
graphs, where the goal is to establish a property of the entire graph, properties of each
node or edge, or the presence of additional edges in the graph.
Graph neural networks are deep learning models that are applied to graphs. Since the
node order in graphs is arbitrary, the layers of graph neural networks must be equivariant
to permutations of the node indices. Spatial-based convolutional networks are a family
of graph neural networks that aggregate information from the neighbors of a node and
then use this to update the node embeddings.
One challenge of processing graphs is that they often occur in the transductive setting,
where there is only one partially labeled graph rather than sets of training and test
graphs. This graph can be extremely large, which adds further challenges in terms of
training and has led to sampling and partitioning algorithms. The edge graph has a
node for every edge in the original graph. By converting to this representation, graph
neural networks can be used to update the edge embeddings.
Notes
Sanchez-Lengeling et al. (2021) and Daigavane et al. (2021) present good introductory articles
on graph processing using neural networks. Recent surveys of research in graph neural networks
can be found in articles by Zhou et al. (2020a), Wu et al. (2020c), and Veličković (2023), and
the books of Hamilton (2020) and Ma & Tang (2021). GraphEDM (Chami et al., 2020) unifies


===== PDF 276 / книга 262 =====
262 13 Graph neural networks
many existing graph algorithms into a single framework. In this chapter, we have related graphs
to convolutional networks following Bruna et al. (2013), but there are also strong connections
with belief propagation (Dai et al., 2016) and graph isomorphism tests (Hamilton et al., 2017a).
Zhang et al. (2019c) provide a review focusing specifically on graph convolutional networks.
Bronstein et al. (2021) provide a general overview of geometric deep learning, including learning
on graphs. Loukas (2020) discusses what types of functions graph neural networks can learn.
Applications: Applications include graph classification (e.g., Zhang et al., 2018b), node clas-
sification (e.g., Kipf & Welling, 2017), edge prediction (e.g., Zhang & Chen, 2018), graph clus-
tering (e.g., Tsitsulin et al., 2020), and recommender systems (e.g., Wu et al., 2023). Methods
for node classification are reviewed by Xiao et al. (2022a), methods for graph classification by
Errica et al. (2019), and methods for edge prediction by Mutlu et al. (2020) and Kumar et al.
(2020a).
Graph neural networks: Graph neural networks were introduced by Gori et al. (2005) and
Scarselli et al. (2008), who formulated them as a generalization of recursive neural networks.
The latter model used the iterative update:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
hn ← f xn, xm∈ne[n], ee∈nee[n], hm∈ne[n], ϕ , (13.25)
in which each node embedding hn is updated from the initial embedding xn, initial embed-
d ad in ja g c s e x n m t ∈ n n o e d [n e ] e a m t b t e h d e d a in d g ja s ce h n m t ∈ n n o e d [n e ] s . , i F n o it r ia c l o e n m ve b r e g d e d n i c n e g , s th ee e ∈n fu e n e c [n t ] io a n t f t [ h • e , • a , d • j , a • c , e ϕ nt ] e m d u g s e t s, b a e nd a
contraction mapping (see figure 16.9). If we unroll this equation in time for K steps and allow
v d o iff lu e t r i e o n n t a p l a n r e a t m w e o t r e k r . s ϕ Sukb a s t eq e u a e ch nt ti w m o e rk K e , x t t h e e n n de e d qu g a r t a i p on h 1 n 3 e . u 2 r 5 al be n c e o t m wo e r s k s s im to ila u r se to g t a h t e ed gr r a e p cu h r c r o en n t -
units (Li et al., 2016b) and long short-term memory networks (Selsam et al., 2019).
Spectral methods: Bruna et al. (2013) applied the convolution operation in the Fourier
domain. The Fourier basis vectors can be found by taking the eigendecomposition of the graph
Laplacian matrix, L = D − A where D is the degree matrix and A is the adjacency matrix.
This has disadvantages: the filters are not localized, and the decomposition is prohibitively
expensive for large graphs. Henaff et al. (2015) tackled the first problem by forcing the Fourier
representation to be smooth (and hence the spatial domain to be localized). Defferrard et al.
(2016) introduced ChebNet, which approximates the filters eﬀiciently by using the recursive
properties of Chebyshev polynomials. This both provides spatially localized filters and reduces
the computation. Kipf & Welling (2017) simplified this further to construct filters that use only
a 1-hop neighborhood, resulting in a formulation similar to the spatial methods described in
this chapter and providing a bridge between spectral and spatial methods.
Spatial methods: Spectral methods are ultimately based on the Graph Laplacian, so if the
graph changes, the model must be retrained. This problem spurred the development of spatial
methods. Duvenaud et al. (2015) defined convolutions in the spatial domain, using a different
weight matrix to combine the adjacent embeddings for each node degree. This has the disad-
vantage that it becomes impractical if some nodes have a very large number of connections.
Diffusion convolutional neural networks (Atwood & Towsley, 2016) use powers of the normal-
ized adjacency matrix to blend features across different scales, sum these, pointwise multiply by
weights, and pass through an activation function to create the node embeddings. Gilmer et al.
(2017) introduced message-passing neural networks, which defined convolutions on the graph
as propagating messages from spatial neighbors. The “aggregate and combine” formulation of
GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a) fits into this framework.


===== PDF 277 / книга 263 =====
Notes 263
Aggregate and combine: Graph convolutional networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017) take a
weighted average of the neighbors and current node and then apply a linear mapping and
ReLU. GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a) applies a neural network layer to each neighbor,
taking the elementwise maximum to aggregate. Chiang et al. (2019) propose diagonal enhance-
ment in which the previous embedding is weighted more than the neighbors. Kipf & Welling
(2017) introduced Kipf normalization, which normalizes the sum of the neighboring embeddings
based on the degrees of the current node and its neighbors (see equation 13.19).
The mixture model network or MoNet (Monti et al., 2017) takes this one step further by learning
a weighting based on the degrees of the current node and the neighbor. They associate a pseudo-
coordinate system with each node, where the positions of the neighbors depend on these two
quantities. They then learn a continuous function based on a mixture of Gaussians and sample
this at the pseudo-coordinates of the neighbors to get the weights. In this way, they can learn
the weightings for nodes and neighbors with arbitrary degrees. Pham et al. (2017) use a linear
interpolation of the node embedding and neighbors with a different weighted combination for
each dimension. The weight of this gating mechanism is generated as a function of the data.
Higher-order convolutional layers: Zhou & Li (2017) used higher-order convolutions by
replacing the adjacency matrix A with A˜ = Min[AL + I, 1] where L is the maximum walk-
length, 1 is a matrix containing only ones, and Min[•] takes the pointwise minimum of its two
matrix arguments; the updates now sum together contributions from any nodes where there is
at least one walk of length L. Abu-El-Haija et al. (2019) proposed MixHop, which computes
node updates from the neighbors (using the adjacency matrix A), the neighbors of the neighbors
(using A2), and so on. They concatenate these updates at each layer. Lee et al. (2018) combined
information from nodes beyond the immediate neighbors using geometric motifs, which are small
local geometric patterns in the graph (e.g., a fully connected clique of five nodes).
Residual connections: Kipf & Welling (2017) proposed a residual connection in which the
original embeddings are added to the updated ones. Hamilton et al. (2017b) concatenate the
previous embedding to the output of the next layer (see equation 13.16). Rossi et al. (2020)
present an inception-style network where the node embedding is concatenated to not only the
aggregation of its neighbors but also the aggregation of all neighbors within a walk of two (via
computing powers of the adjacency matrix). Xu et al. (2018) introduced jump knowledge con-
nections in which the final output at each node consists of the concatenated node embeddings
throughout the network. Zhang & Meng (2019) present a general formulation of residual em-
beddings called GResNet and investigate several variations in which the embeddings from the
previous layer are added, the input embeddings are added, or versions of these that aggregate
information from their neighbors (without further transformation) are added.
Attention in graph neural networks: Veličković et al. (2019) developed the graph attention
network (figure 13.12c). Their formulation uses multiple heads whose outputs are combined
symmetrically. Gated Attention Networks (Zhang et al., 2018a) weight the output of the different
heads in a way that depends on the data itself. Graph-BERT (Zhang et al., 2020) performs
node classification using self-attention alone; the graph’s structure is captured by adding position
embeddings to the data, similarly to how the absolute or relative position of words is captured
in the transformer (chapter 12). For example, they add positional information that depends on
the number of hops between nodes in the graph.
Permutation invariance: In DeepSets, Zaheer et al. (2017) presented a general permutation
invariant operator for processing sets. Janossy pooling (Murphy et al., 2018) accepts that many
functions are not permutation equivariant and instead uses a permutation-sensitive function
and averages the results across many permutations.


===== PDF 278 / книга 264 =====
264 13 Graph neural networks
Edge graphs: The notation of the edge graph, line graph, or adjoint graph dates to Whitney
(1932). The idea of “weaving” layers that update node embeddings from node embeddings,
node embeddings from edge embeddings, edge embeddings from edge embeddings, and edge
embeddings from node embeddings was proposed by Kearnes et al. (2016). However, here the
node-node and edge-edge updates do not involve the neighbors. Monti et al. (2018) introduced
the dual-primal graph CNN, a modern formulation in a CNN framework that alternates between
updates in the original and edge graphs.
Power of graph neural networks: Xu et al. (2019) argue that a neural network should
be able to distinguish different graph structures; it is undesirable to map two graphs to the
same output if they have the same initial node embeddings but different adjacency matrices.
They identified graph structures that could not be distinguished by previous approaches such
as GCNs (Kipf & Welling, 2017) and GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a). They developed a
more powerful architecture with the same discriminative power as the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph
isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968), which is known to discriminate a broad class of
graphs. This resulting graph isomorphism network was based on the aggregation operation:
2 3
X
h( k n + ) 1 = mlp 4(1 + ϵk) h( k n) + m∈ne[n] h( k m)5 . (13.26)
Batches: The original paper on graph convolutional networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017) used full-
batch gradient descent. This has memory requirements proportional to the number of nodes,
embedding size, and number of layers during training. Since then, three types of methods
have been proposed to reduce the memory requirements and create batches for SGD in the
transductive setting: node sampling, layer sampling, and sub-graph sampling.
Node sampling methods start by randomly selecting a subset of target nodes and then work
back through the network, adding a subset of the nodes in the receptive field at each stage.
GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a) proposed a fixed number of neighborhood samples as
in figure 13.10b. Chen et al. (2018b) introduce a variance reduction technique, but this uses
historical activations of nodes and so still has a high memory requirement. PinSAGE (Ying
et al., 2018a) uses random walks from the target nodes and chooses the K nodes with the highest
visit count. This prioritizes ancestors that are more closely connected.
Node sampling still requires increasing numbers of nodes as we pass back through the graph.
Layer sampling methods address this by directly sampling the receptive field in each layer
independently. Examples of layer sampling include FastGCN (Chen et al., 2018a), adaptive
sampling (Huang et al., 2018b), and layer-dependent importance sampling (Zou et al., 2019).
Subgraph sampling methods randomly draw subgraphs or divide the original graph into sub-
graphs. These are then trained as independent data examples. Examples of these approaches
include GraphSAINT (Zeng et al., 2020), which samples sub-graphs during training using ran-
dom walks and then runs a full GCN on the subgraph while also correcting for the bias and
variance of the minibatch. Cluster GCN (Chiang et al., 2019) partitions the graph into clusters
(by maximizing the embedding utilization or number of within-batch edges) in a pre-processing
stage and randomly selects clusters to form minibatches. To create more randomness, they train
random subsets of these clusters plus the edges between them (see figure 13.11).
Wolfe et al. (2021) proposed a distributed training method that both partitions the graph and
trains narrower GCNs in parallel by partitioning the feature space at different layers. More
information about sampling graphs can be found in Rozemberczki et al. (2020).
Regularization and normalization: Rong et al. (2020) proposed DropEdge, which randomly
drops edges from the graph during each training iteration by masking the adjacency matrix. This


===== PDF 279 / книга 265 =====
Notes 265
can be done for the whole neural network or differently in each layer (layer-wise DropEdge). In a
sense, this is similar to dropout in that it breaks connections in the flow of data, but it can also be
considered an augmentation method since changing the graph is similar to perturbing the data.
Schlichtkrull et al. (2018), Teru et al. (2020), and Veličković et al. (2019) also proposed randomly
dropping edges from the graph as a form of regularization similar to dropout. Node sampling
methods (Hamilton et al., 2017a; Huang et al., 2018b; Chen et al., 2018a) can also be considered
regularizers. Hasanzadeh et al. (2020) present a general framework called DropConnect that
unifies many of the above approaches.
There are also many proposed normalization schemes for graph neural networks, including
PairNorm (Zhao & Akoglu, 2020), weight normalization (Oono & Suzuki, 2019), differentiable
group normalization (Zhou et al., 2020b), and GraphNorm (Cai et al., 2021).
Multi-relational graphs: Schlichtkrull et al. (2018) proposed a variation of graph convolu-
tional networks for multi-relational graphs (i.e., graphs with more than one edge type). Their
scheme separately aggregates information from each edge type using different parameters. If
there are many edge types, the number of parameters may become large, and to combat this,
they propose that each edge type uses a different weighting of a basis set of parameters.
Hierarchical representations and pooling: CNNs for image classification gradually de-
crease the representation size but increase the number of channels as the network progresses.
However, the GCNs for graph classification in this chapter maintain the entire graph until the
last layer and then combine all the nodes to compute the final prediction. Ying et al. (2018b)
proposed DiffPool, which clusters graph nodes to make a graph that gets progressively smaller
as the depth increases in a way that is differentiable, and so can be learned. This can be done
based on the graph structure alone or adaptively based on the graph structure and the embed-
dings. Other pooling methods include SortPool (Zhang et al., 2018b) and self-attention graph
pooling (Lee et al., 2019). A comparison of pooling layers for graph neural networks can be
found in Grattarola et al. (2022). Gao & Ji (2019) propose an encoder-decoder structure for
graphs based on the U-Net (see figure 11.10).
Geometric graphs: The MoNet model (Monti et al., 2017) can exploit geometric information
because neighboring nodes have well-defined spatial positions. They learn a mixture of Gaus-
sians function and sample from this based on the relative coordinates of the neighbor. In this
way, they can weight neighboring nodes based on their relative positions as in standard convolu-
tional neural networks, even though these positions are not constant. The geodesic CNN (Masci
et al., 2015) and anisotropic CNN (Boscaini et al., 2016) both adapt convolution to manifolds
(i.e., surfaces) as represented by triangular meshes. They locally approximate the surface as a
plane and define a coordinate system on this plane around the current node.
Oversmoothing and suspended animation: Unlike other deep learning models, graph neu-
ral networks did not, until recently, benefit significantly from increasing depth. Indeed, the orig-
inal GCN paper (Kipf & Welling, 2017) and GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a) both only
use two layers, and Chiang et al. (2019) trained a five-layer Cluster-GCN to get state-of-the-art
performance on the PPI dataset. One possible explanation is over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018c);
at each layer, the network incorporates information from a larger neighborhood, and it may
be that this ultimately results in the dissolution of (important) local information. Indeed (Xu
et al., 2018) prove that the influence of one node on another is proportional to the probability
of reaching that node in a K-step random walk. This approaches the stationary distribution of
walks over the graph with increasing K, causing the local neighborhood to be washed out.
Alon & Yahav (2021) proposed another explanation for why performance doesn’t improve with
network depth. They argue that adding depth allows information to be aggregated from longer
paths. However, in practice, the exponential growth in the number of neighbors means there is
a bottleneck whereby too much information is “squashed” into the fixed-size node embeddings.


===== PDF 280 / книга 266 =====
266 13 Graph neural networks
Figure 13.14 Graphs for problems 13.1, 13.3, and 13.8.
Ying et al. (2018a) also note that when the depth of the network exceeds a certain limit, the
gradients no longer propagate back, and learning fails for both the training and test data. They
term this effect suspended animation. This is similar to when many layers are naïvely added to
convolutional neural networks (figure 11.2). They propose a family of residual connections that
allow deeper networks to be trained. Vanishing gradients (section 7.5) have also been identified
as a limitation by Li et al. (2021b).
It has recently become possible to train deeper graph neural networks using various forms of
residual connection (Xu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020a; Gong et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Xu
et al., 2021a). Li et al. (2021a) train a state-of-the-art model with more than 1000 layers using
an invertible network to reduce the memory requirements of training (see chapter 16).
Problems
Problem 13.1 Write out the adjacency matrices for the two graphs in figure 13.14.
Problem 13.2∗ Draw graphs that correspond to the following adjacency matrices:
2 3 2 3
0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1
A1 =
666666664 1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
777777775
and A2 =
666666664 0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
777777775
.
0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0
Problem 13.3∗ Consider the two graphs in figure 13.14. How many ways are there to walk from
node one to node two in (i) three steps and (ii) seven steps?
Problem 13.4 The diagonal of A2 in figure 13.4c contains the number of edges that connect to
each corresponding node. Explain this phenomenon.
Problem 13.5 What permutation matrix is responsible for the transformation between the
A P pp er e m nd u i t x at B io .4 n .4 graphs in figures 13.5a–c and figure 13.5d–f?
matrix
Problem 13.6 Prove that:
sig [βK + ωKHK1] = sig [βK + ωKHKP1] , (13.27)


===== PDF 281 / книга 267 =====
Notes 267
Figure 13.15 Graphs for problems 13.11–13.13.
where P is an N ×N permutation matrix (a matrix that is all zeros except for exactly one entry
in each row and each column, which is one), and 1 is an N × 1 vector of ones.
Problem 13.7∗ Consider the simple GNN layer:
Hk+1 = G(cid:20)raphLayer[H(cid:20)k, A] (cid:21)(cid:21)
= a βk1T + Ωk H H k k A , (13.28)
where H is a D × N matrix containing the N node embeddings in its columns, A is the N × N
adjacency matrix, β is the bias vector, and Ω is the weight matrix. Show that this layer is
equivariant to permutations of the node order so that:
GraphLayer[Hk, A]P = GraphLayer[HkP, PT AP], (13.29)
where P is an N × N permutation matrix.
Problem 13.8 What is the degree matrix D for each graph in figure 13.14?
Problem 13.9 The authors of GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a) propose a pooling method
in which the node embedding is averaged together with its neighbors so that:
0 1
agg[n] = 1 + | 1 ne[n]| @hn + m∈ X ne[n] hm A . (13.30)
Show how this operation can be computed simultaneously for all node embeddings in the D ×N
embedding matrix H using linear algebra. You will need to use both the adjacency matrix A
and the degree matrix D.
Problem 13.10∗ Devise a graph attention mechanism based on dot-product self-attention and
draw its mechanism in the style of figure 13.12.
Problem 13.11∗ Draw the edge graph associated with the graph in figure 13.15a.
Problem 13.12∗ Draw the node graph corresponding to the edge graph in figure 13.15b.
Problem 13.13 For a general undirected graph, describe how the adjacency matrix of the node
graph relates to the adjacency matrix of the corresponding edge graph.
P no ro d b e le e m mb 1 e 3 d . d 1 i 4 n ∗ gs D { e h si m gn }m a ∈n la e y [n e ] r a t n h d at n u e p ig d h a b t o e r s in a g n e o d d g e e e e m m b b e e d d d d i i n n g gs h {n e b m a } s m ed ∈n o e n e[n it ] s . n Y e o ig u h s b h o o r u in ld g
consider the possibility that the edge embeddings are not the same size as the node embeddings.
