

===== PDF 415 / книга 401 =====
Chapter 20
Why does deep learning work?
This chapter differs from those that precede it. Instead of presenting established results,
it poses questions about how and why deep learning works so well. These questions are
rarely discussed in textbooks. However, it’s important to realize that (despite the title
of this book) understanding of deep learning is still limited.
We argue that it is surprising that deep networks are easy to train and also surprising
that they generalize. Then we consider each of these topics in turn. We enumerate the
factors that influence training success and discuss what is known about loss functions for
deep networks. Then we consider the factors that influence generalization. We conclude
with a discussion of whether networks need to be overparameterized and deep.
20.1 The case against deep learning
The MNIST-1D dataset (figure 8.1) has just forty input dimensions and ten output
dimensions. With enough hidden units per layer, a two-layer fully connected network
classifies 10000 MNIST-1D training data points perfectly and generalizes reasonably to
unseen examples (figure 8.10a). Indeed, we now take it for granted that with suﬀicient
hidden units, deep networks will classify almost any training set near-perfectly. We also
take for granted that the fitted model will generalize to new data. However, it’s not at
all obvious either that the training process should succeed or that the resulting model
should generalize. This section argues that both these phenomena are surprising.
20.1.1 Training
Performance of a two-layer fully connected network on 10000 MNIST-1D training exam-
ples is perfect once there are 43 hidden units per layer (∼4000 parameters). However,
finding the global minimum of an arbitrary non-convex function is NP-hard (Murty &
Kabadi, 1987), and this is also true for certain neural network loss functions (Blum &
Rivest, 1992). It’s remarkable that the fitting algorithm doesn’t get trapped in local min-
ima or stuck near saddle points and that it can eﬀiciently recruit spare model capacity


===== PDF 416 / книга 402 =====
402 20 Why does deep learning work?
to fit unexplained training data wherever they lie.
Perhaps this success is less surprising when there are far more parameters than train-
ing data. However, it’s debatable whether this is generally the case. AlexNet had ∼60
million parameters and was trained with ∼1 million data points. However, to complicate
matters, each training example was augmented with 2048 transformations. GPT-3 had
175 billion parameters and was trained with 300 billion tokens. There is not a clear-cut
case that either model was overparameterized, and yet they were successfully trained.
In short, it’s surprising that we can fit deep networks reliably and eﬀiciently. Either
the data, the models, the training algorithms, or some combination of all three must
have some special properties that make this possible.
20.1.2 Generalization
If the eﬀicient fitting of neural networks is startling, their generalization to new data
is dumbfounding. First, it’s not obvious a priori that typical datasets are suﬀicient to
characterize the input/output mapping. The curse of dimensionality implies that the
training dataset is tiny compared to the possible inputs; if each of the 40 inputs of the
MNIST-1D data were quantized into 10 possible values, there would be 1040 possible
inputs, which is a factor of 1035 more than the number of training examples.
Problem 20.1 Second, deep networks describe very complicated functions. A fully connected net-
work for MNIST-1D with two hidden layers of width 400 can create mappings with up
to 1042 linear regions. That’s roughly 1037 regions per training example, so very few of
these regions contain data at any stage during training; regardless, those regions that do
encounter data points constrain the remaining regions to behave reasonably.
Third, generalization gets better with more parameters (figure 8.10). The model in the
previous paragraph has 177,201 parameters. Assuming it can fit one training example
per parameter, it has 167,201 spare degrees of freedom. This surfeit gives the model
latitude to do almost anything between the training data, and yet it behaves sensibly.
20.1.3 The unreasonable effectiveness of deep learning
To summarize, it’s neither obvious that we should be able to fit deep networks nor that
they should generalize. A priori, deep learning shouldn’t work. And yet it does. This
chapter investigates why. Sections 20.2–20.3 describe what we know about fitting deep
networks and their loss functions. Sections 20.4–20.6 examine generalization.
20.2 Factors that influence fitting performance
Figure 6.4 showed that loss functions for nonlinear models can have both local minima
and saddle points. However, we can reliably fit deep networks to complex training sets.
For example, figure 8.10 shows perfect training performance on MNIST-1D, MNIST, and
CIFAR-100. This section considers factors that might resolve this contradiction.


===== PDF 417 / книга 403 =====
20.2 Factors that influence fitting performance 403
Figure 20.1 Fitting random data. Losses
for AlexNet architecture trained on
CIFAR-10 dataset with SGD. When the
pixels are drawn from a Gaussian ran-
dom distribution with the same mean
and variance as the original data, the
model can still be fit (albeit more
slowly). When the labels are random-
ized, the model can still be fit (albeit
even more slowly). Adapted from Zhang
et al. (2017a).
20.2.1 Dataset
It’s important to realize that we can’t learn any function. Consider a completely random
mapping from every possible 28×28 binary image to one of ten categories. Since there
is no structure to this function, the only recourse is to memorize the 2784 assignments.
However, it’s easy to train a model on the MNIST dataset (figures 8.10 and 15.15),
which contains 60,000 examples of 28×28 images labeled with one of ten categories. One
explanation for this contradiction could be that it is easy to find global minima because
the real-world functions that we approximate are relatively simple.1
This hypothesis was investigated by Zhang et al. (2017a), who trained AlexNet on the
CIFAR-10 image classification dataset when (i) each image was replaced with Gaussian N R o a t n e d b o o m ok d 2 a 0 t . a 1
noise and (ii) the labels of the ten classes were randomly permuted (figure 20.1). These
changes slowed down learning, but the network could still fit this finite dataset well.
This suggests that the properties of the dataset aren’t critical. Problem 20.2
20.2.2 Regularization
Another possible explanation for the ease with which models are trained is that some
regularization methods like L2 regularization (weight decay) make the loss surface flatter
and more convex. However, Zhang et al. (2017a) found that neither L2 regularization nor
Dropout was required to fit random data. This does not eliminate implicit regularization
due to the finite step size of the fitting algorithms (section 9.2). However, this effect
increases with the learning rate (equation 9.9), and model-fitting does not get easier
with larger learning rates.
20.2.3 Stochastic training algorithms
Chapter 6 argued that the SGD algorithm potentially allows the optimization trajectory
to move between “valleys” during training. However, Keskar et al. (2017) show that
several models (including fully connected and convolutional networks) can be fit to many
1In this chapter, we use the term “global minimum” loosely to mean any solution where all data are
classified correctly. We have no way of knowing if there are solutions with a lower loss elsewhere.


===== PDF 418 / книга 404 =====
404 20 Why does deep learning work?
Figure 20.2 MNIST-1D training. Four
fully connected networks were fit to 4000
MNIST-1D examples with random labels
using full batch gradient descent, He ini-
tialization, no momentum or regulariza-
tion, and learning rate 0.0025. Mod-
els with 1,2,3,4 layers had 298, 100, 75,
and 63 hidden units per layer and 15208,
15210, 15235, and 15139 parameters, re-
spectively. All models train successfully,
but deeper models require fewer epochs.
datasets (including CIFAR-100 and MNIST) almost perfectly with very large batches of
5000-6000 images. This eliminates most of the randomness but training still succeeds.
Figure 20.2 shows training results for four fully connected models fitted to 4000
No F t u e l b l o b o a k tc 2 h 0.2 MNIST-1D examples with randomized labels using full-batch (i.e., non-stochastic) gra-
gradient descent dient descent. There was no explicit regularization, and the learning rate was set to a
small constant value of 0.0025 to minimize implicit regularization. Here, the true map-
Problem 20.3 ping from data to labels has no structure, the training is deterministic, and there is no
regularization, and yet the training error still decreases to zero. This suggests that these
loss functions may genuinely have no local minima.
20.2.4 Overparameterization
Overparameterization almost certainly is an important factor that contributes to ease
of training. It implies that there is a large family of degenerate solutions, so there may
always be a direction in which the parameters can be modified to decrease the loss.
Sejnowski (2020) suggests that “. . . the degeneracy of solutions changes the nature of
the problem from finding a needle in a haystack to a haystack of needles.”
In practice, networks are frequently overparameterized by one or two orders of mag-
nitude (figure 20.3). However, data augmentation makes it diﬀicult to make precise
statements. Augmentation may increase the data by several orders of magnitude, but
these are manipulations of existing examples rather than independent new data points.
Moreover, figure 8.10 shows that neural networks can sometimes fit the training data
well when there are the same number or fewer parameters than data points. This is
presumably due to redundancy in training examples from the same underlying function.
Several theoretical convergence results show that, under certain circumstances, SGD
converges to a global minimum when the network is suﬀiciently overparameterized. For
example, Du et al. (2019b) show that randomly initialized SGD converges to a global
minimum for shallow fully connected ReLU networks with a least squares loss with
enough hidden units. Similarly, Du et al. (2019a) consider deep, residual, and convolu-
tional networks when the activation function is smooth and Lipschitz. Zou et al. (2020)
analyzed the convergence of gradient descent on deep, fully connected networks using a
hinge loss. Allen-Zhu et al. (2019) considered deep networks with ReLU functions.
If a neural network is suﬀiciently overparameterized so that it can memorize any


===== PDF 419 / книга 405 =====
20.2 Factors that influence fitting performance 405
Figure 20.3 Overparameterization. Im-
ageNet performance for convolutional
nets as a function of overparameteriza-
tion (in multiples of dataset size). Most
models have 10–100 times more param-
eters than there were training exam-
ples. Models compared are ResNet (He
et al., 2016a,b), DenseNet (Huang et al.,
2017b), Xception (Chollet, 2017), Eﬀi-
cientNet (Tan & Le, 2019), Inception
(Szegedy et al., 2017), ResNeXt (Xie
et al., 2017), and AmoebaNet (Cubuk
et al., 2019).
dataset of a fixed size, then all stationary points become global minima (Livni et al.,
2014; Nguyen & Hein, 2017, 2018). Other results show that if the network is wide
enough, local minima where the loss is higher than the global minimum are rare (see
Choromanska et al., 2015; Pascanu et al., 2014; Pennington & Bahri, 2017). Kawaguchi
et al. (2019) prove that as a network becomes deeper, wider, or both, the loss at local
minima becomes closer to that at the global minimum for squared loss functions.
These theoretical results are intriguing but usually make unrealistic assumptions
about the network structure. For example, Du et al. (2019a) show that residual networks
converge to zero training loss when the width of the network D (i.e., the number of hidden
units) is O[I4K2] where I is the amount of training data, and K is the depth of the
network. Similarly, Nguyen & Hein (2017) assume that the network’s width is larger than
the dataset size, which is unrealistic in most practical scenarios. Overparameterization
seems to be important, but theory cannot yet explain empirical fitting performance.
20.2.5 Activation functions
The activation function is also known to affect training diﬀiculty. Networks where the
activation only changes over a small part of the input range are harder to fit than ReLUs
(which vary over half the input range) or Leaky ReLUs (which vary over the full range);
For example, sigmoid and tanh nonlinearities (figure 3.13a) have shallow gradients in
their tails; where the activation function is near-constant, the training gradient is near-
zero, so there is no mechanism to improve the model.
20.2.6 Initialization
Another potential explanation is that Xavier/He initialization sets the parameters to
values that are easy to optimize. Of course, for deeper networks, such initialization is
necessary to avoid exploding and vanishing gradients, so in a trivial sense, initialization
is critical to training success. However, for shallower networks, the initial variance of the
weights is less important. Liu et al. (2023c) trained a 3-layer fully connected network with


===== PDF 420 / книга 406 =====
406 20 Why does deep learning work?
Figure 20.4 Initialization and fitting. A
three-layer fully connected network with
200 hidden units per layer was trained
on 1000 MNIST examples with AdamW
using one-hot targets and mean-squared
error loss. It takes longer to fit networks
when larger multiples of He initialization
are used, but this doesn’t change the out-
come. This may simply reflect the ex-
tra distance that the weights must move.
Adapted from Liu et al. (2023c).
200 hidden units per layer on 1000 MNIST data points. They found that more iterations
were required to fit the training data as the variance increased from that proposed by He
(figure 20.4), but this did not ultimately impede fitting. Hence, initialization doesn’t shed
much light on why fitting neural networks is easy, although exploding/vanishing gradients
do reveal initializations that make training diﬀicult with finite precision arithmetic.
20.2.7 Network depth
Neural networks are harder to fit when the depth becomes very large due to exploding
and vanishing gradients (figure 7.7) and shattered gradients (figure 11.3). However,
these are (arguably) practical numerical issues. There is no definitive evidence that
the underlying loss function is fundamentally more or less convex as the network depth
increases. Figure 20.2 does show that for MNIST data with randomized labels and He
initialization, deeper networks train in fewer iterations. However, this might be because
either (i) the gradients in deeper networks are steeper or (ii) He initialization just starts
wider, shallower networks further away from the optimal parameters.
Frankle & Carbin (2019) show that for small networks like VGG, you can get the
same or better performance if you (i) train the network, (ii) prune the weights with
the smallest magnitudes and (iii) retrain from the same initial weights. This does not
work if the weights are randomly re-initialized. They concluded that the original over-
parameterized network contains small trainable sub-networks, which are suﬀicient to
L N o o t t t e e b r o y o t k ic 2 k 0 e . t 3 s provide the performance. They term this the lottery ticket hypothesis and denote the
sub-networks as winning tickets. This suggests that the effective number of sub-networks
may have a key role to play in fitting. This (perhaps) varies with the network depth for
a fixed parameter count, but a precise characterization of this idea is lacking.
20.3 Properties of loss functions
The previous section discussed factors that contribute to the ease with which neural net-
works can be trained. The number of parameters (degree of overparameterization) and
the choice of activation function are both important. Surprisingly, the choice of dataset,


===== PDF 421 / книга 407 =====
20.3 Properties of loss functions 407
the randomness of the fitting algorithm, and the use of regularization don’t seem impor-
tant. There is no definitive evidence that (for a fixed parameter count) the depth of the
network matters (other than numerical problems due to exploding/vanishing/shattered
gradients). This section tackles the same topic from a different angle by considering the
empirical properties of loss functions. Most of this evidence comes from fully connected
networks and CNNs; loss functions of transformer networks are less well understood.
20.3.1 Multiple global minima
We expect loss functions for deep networks to have a large family of equivalent global
minima. In fully connected networks, the hidden units at each layer and their associated
weights can be permuted without changing the output. In convolutional networks, per-
muting the channels and convolution kernels appropriately doesn’t change the output.
We can multiply the weight before any ReLU function and divide the weight after by a
positive number without changing the output. Using BatchNorm induces another set of
redundancies because the mean and variance of each hidden unit or channel are reset.
The above modifications all produce the same output for every input. However, the
global minimum only depends on the output at the training data points. In overparam-
eterized networks, there will also be families of solutions that behave identically at the
data points but differently between them. All of these are also global minima.
20.3.2 Route to the minimum
Goodfellow et al. (2015b) considered a straight line between the initial parameters and
the final values. They show that the loss function along this line usually decreases
monotonically (except for a small bump near the start sometimes). This phenomenon is
observed for several different types of networks and activation functions (figure 20.5a).
Of course, real optimization trajectories do not proceed in a straight line. However,
Li et al. (2018b) find that they do lie in low-dimensional subspaces. They attribute this
to the existence of large, nearly convex regions in the loss landscape that capture the
trajectory early on and funnel it in a few important directions. Surprisingly, Li et al.
(2018a) showed that networks still train well if optimization is constrained to lie in a
random low-dimensional subspace (figure 20.6).
Li & Liang (2018) show that the relative change in the parameters during training
decreases as network width increases; for larger widths, the parameters start at smaller
values, change by a smaller proportion of those values, and converge in fewer steps.
20.3.3 Connections between minima
Goodfellow et al. (2015b) examined the loss function along a straight line between two
minima that were found independently. They saw a pronounced increase in the loss be-
tween them (figure 20.5b); good minima are not generally linearly connected. However,


===== PDF 422 / книга 408 =====
408 20 Why does deep learning work?
Figure 20.5 Linear slices through loss function. a) A two-layer fully connected
ReLU network is trained on MNIST. The loss along a straight line starting at the
initial parameters (δ=0) and finishing at the trained parameters (δ=1) descends
monotonically. b) However, in this two-layer fully connected MaxOut network on
MNIST, there is an increase in the loss along a straight line between one solution
(δ=0) and another (δ=1). Adapted from Goodfellow et al. (2015b).
Figure 20.6 Subspace training. A fully
connected network with two hidden lay-
ers, each with 200 units was trained on
MNIST. Parameters were initialized us-
ing a standard method but then con-
strained to lie within a random sub-
space. Performance reaches 90% of the
unconstrained level when this subspace is
750D (termed the intrinsic dimension),
which is 0.4% of the original parameters.
Adapted from Li et al. (2018a).
Frankle et al. (2020) showed that this increase vanishes if the networks are identically
trained initially and later allowed to diverge by using different SGD noise and augmen-
tation. This suggests that the solution is constrained early in training and that some
families of minima are linearly connected.
Draxler et al. (2018) found minima with good (but different) performance on the
CIFAR-10 dataset. They then showed that it is possible to construct paths from one to
the other, where the loss function remains low along this path. They conclude that there
is a single connected manifold of low loss (figure 20.7). This seems to be increasingly
true as the width and depth of the network increase. Garipov et al. (2018) and Fort &
Jastrzębski (2019) present other schemes for connecting minima.
20.3.4 Curvature of loss surface
Random Gaussian functions (in which points are jointly distributed with covariance
given by a kernel function of their distance) have an interesting property: for points


===== PDF 423 / книга 409 =====
20.3 Properties of loss functions 409
Figure 20.7 Connections between min-
ima. A slice through the loss function
of DenseNet on CIFAR-10. Parameters
e ϕ r1ed an m d i ϕ ni2m a a r . e tw L o in i e n a d r ep in e t n e d rp en o t la ly ti d o i n sc b ov e- -
tween these parameters reveals an en-
ergy barrier (dashed line). However, for
suﬀiciently deep and wide networks, it
is possible to find a curved path of low
energy between two minima (cyan line).
Adapted from Draxler et al. (2018).
Figure 20.8 Critical points vs. loss. a) In random Gaussian functions, the number
of directions in which the function curves down at points with zero gradient
decreases with the height of the function, so minima all appear at lower function
values. b) Dauphin et al. (2014) found critical points on a neural network loss
surface (i.e., points with zero gradient). They showed that the proportion of
negative eigenvalues (directions that point down) decreases with the loss. The
implication is that all minima (points with zero gradient where no directions
point down) have low losses. Adapted from Dauphin et al. (2014) and Bahri
et al. (2020).
Figure 20.9 Goldilocks zone. The pro-
portion of eigenvalues of the Hessian that
are greater than zero (a measure of pos-
itive curvature/convexity) within a ran-
dom subspace of dimension Ds in a two-
layer fully connected network with ReLU
functions applied to MNIST as a func-
tion of the squared radius r2 of the pa-
rameters relative to Xavier initialization.
There is a pronounced region of positive
curvature known as the Goldilocks zone.
Adapted from Fort & Scherlis (2019).


===== PDF 424 / книга 410 =====
410 20 Why does deep learning work?
Figure 20.10 Batch size to learning rate
ratio. Generalization of two models
on the CIFAR-10 database depends on
the ratio of batch size to the learning
rate. As the batch size increases, gen-
eralization decreases. As the learning
rate increases, generalization increases.
Adapted from He et al. (2019).
where the gradient is zero, the fraction of directions where the function curves down
becomes smaller when these points occur at lower loss values (see Bahri et al., 2020).
Dauphin et al. (2014) searched for saddle points in a neural network loss function and
similarly found a correlation between the loss and the number of negative eigenvalues
(figure 20.8). Baldi & Hornik (1989) analyzed the error surface of a shallow network and
found that there were no local minima but only saddle points. These results suggest that
there are few or no bad local minima.
Fort & Scherlis (2019) measured the curvature at random points on a neural network
loss surface; they showed that the curvature of the surface is unusually positive when
the ℓ2 norm of the weights lies within a certain range (figure 20.9), which they term the
Goldilocks zone. He and Xavier initialization fall within this range.
20.4 Factors that determine generalization
The last two sections considered factors that determine whether the network trains suc-
cessfully and what is known about neural network loss functions. This section considers
factors that determine how well the network generalizes. This complements the discus-
sion of regularization (chapter 9), which explicitly aims to encourage generalization.
20.4.1 Training algorithms
Since deep networks are usually overparameterized, the details of the training process
determine which of the degenerate family of minima the algorithm converges to. Some
of these details reliably improve generalization.
LeCun et al. (2012) show that SGD generalizes better than full-batch gradient de-
scent. It has been argued that SGD generalizes better than Adam (e.g., Wilson et al.,
2017; Keskar & Socher, 2017), but more recent studies suggest that there is little dif-
ference when the hyperparameter search is done carefully (Choi et al., 2019). Keskar
et al. (2017) show that deep nets generalize better with smaller batch-size when no other
form of regularization is used. It is also well-known that larger learning rates tend to
generalize better (e.g., figure 9.5). Jastrzębski et al. (2018), Goyal et al. (2018), and He


===== PDF 425 / книга 411 =====
20.4 Factors that determine generalization 411
Figure 20.11 Flat vs. sharp minima.
Flat minima are expected to generalize
better. Small errors in estimating the pa-
rameters or in the alignment of the train
and test loss functions are less problem-
atic in flat regions. Adapted from Keskar
et al. (2017).
et al. (2019) argue that the batch size/learning rate ratio is important. He et al. (2019)
show a significant correlation between this ratio and the degree of generalization and
prove a generalization bound for neural networks, which has a positive correlation with
this ratio (figure 20.10).
These observations are aligned with the discovery that SGD implicitly adds regu-
larization terms to the loss function (section 9.2), and their magnitude depends on the
learning rate. The trajectory of the parameters is changed by this regularization, and
they converge to a part of the loss function that generalizes well.
20.4.2 Flatness of minimum
There has been speculation dating at least to Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997a) that
flat minima in the loss function generalize better than sharp minima (figure 20.11).
Informally, if the minimum is flatter, then small errors in the estimated parameters are
less important. This can also be motivated from various theoretical viewpoints. For
example, minimum description length theory suggests models specified by fewer bits
generalize better (Rissanen, 1983). For wide minima, the precision needed to store the
weights is lower, so they should generalize better.
Flatness can be measured by (i) the size of the connected region around the minimum
for which training loss is similar (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997a), (ii) the second-
order curvature around the minimum (Chaudhari et al., 2019), or (iii) the maximum
loss within a neighborhood of the minimum (Keskar et al., 2017). However, caution is
required; estimated flatness can be affected by trivial reparameterizations of the network
due to the non-negative homogeneity property of the ReLU function (Dinh et al., 2017).
Nonetheless, Keskar et al. (2017) varied the batch size and learning rate and showed
that flatness correlates with generalization. Izmailov et al. (2018) average together
weights from multiple points in a learning trajectory. This both results in flatter test
and training surfaces at the minimum and improves generalization. Other regularization
techniques can also be viewed through this lens. For example, averaging model outputs
(ensembling) may also make the test loss surface flatter. Kleinberg et al. (2018) showed
that large gradient variance during training helps avoid sharp regions. This may explain
why reducing the batch size and adding noise helps generalization.
The above studies consider flatness for a single model and training set. However,
sharpness is not a good criterion to predict generalization between datasets; when the


===== PDF 426 / книга 412 =====
412 20 Why does deep learning work?
labels in the CIFAR dataset are randomized (making generalization impossible), there
is no commensurate decrease in the flatness of the minimum (Neyshabur et al., 2017).
20.4.3 Architecture
The inductive bias of a network is determined by its architecture, and judicious choices
of model can drastically improve generalization. Chapter 10 introduced convolutional
networks, which are designed to process data on regular grids; they implicitly assume
that the input statistics are the same across the input, so they share parameters across
position. Similarly, transformers are suited for modeling data that is invariant to permu-
tations, and graph neural networks are suited to data represented on irregular graphs.
Matching the architecture to the properties of the data improves generalization over
generic, fully connected architectures (see figure 10.8).
20.4.4 Norm of weights
Section 20.3.4 reviewed the finding of Fort & Scherlis (2019) that the curvature of the loss
surface is unusually positive when the ℓ2 norm of the weights lies within a certain range.
The same authors provided evidence that generalization is also good when the ℓ2 weight
norm falls within this Goldilocks zone (figure 20.12). This is perhaps unsurprising. The
norm of the weights is (indirectly) related to the Lipschitz constant of the model. If this
norm is too small, then the model will not be able to change fast enough to capture the
variation in the underlying function. If the norm is too large, then the model will be
unnecessarily variable between training points and will not interpolate smoothly.
This finding was used by Liu et al. (2023c) to explain the phenomenon of grokking
(Power et al., 2022), in which a sudden improvement in generalization can occur many
epochs after the training error is already zero (figure 20.13). It is proposed that grokking
occurs when the norm of the weights is initially too large; the training data fits well,
but the variation of the model between the data points is large. Over time, implicit or
explicit regularization decreases the norm of the weights until they reach the Goldilocks
zone, and generalization suddenly improves.
20.4.5 Overparameterization
Figure 8.10 showed that generalization performance tends to improve with the degree
of overparameterization. When combined with the bias/variance trade-off curve, this
results in double descent. The putative explanation for this improvement is that the
network has more latitude to become smoother between the training data points when
the model is overparameterized.
It follows that the norm of the weights can also be used to explain double descent.
The norm of the weights increases when the number of parameters is similar to the
number of data points (as the model contorts itself to fit these points exactly), causing


===== PDF 427 / книга 413 =====
20.4 Factors that determine generalization 413
Figure 20.12 Generalization on hyper-
spheres. A fully connected network with
two hidden layers, each with 200 units
(198,450 parameters) was trained on the
MNIST database. The parameters are
initialized to a given ℓ2 norm and then
constrained to maintain this norm and
to lie in a subspace (vertical direction).
The network generalizes well in a small
range around the radius r defined by
Xavier initialization (cyan dotted line).
Adapted from Fort & Scherlis (2019).
Figure 20.13 Grokking. When the pa-
rameters are initialized so that their
ℓ2 norm (radius) is considerably larger
than is specified by He initialization,
training takes longer (dashed lines), and
generalization takes much longer (solid
lines). The lag in generalization is at-
tributed to the time taken for the norm
of the weights to decrease back to the
Goldilocks zone. Adapted from Liu et al.
(2023c).
generalization to reduce. As the network becomes wider and the number of weights
increases, the overall norm of these weights decreases; the weights are initialized with a
variance that is inversely proportional to the width (i.e., with He or Glorot initialization),
and the weights change very little from their original values.
20.4.6 Leaving the data manifold
Until this point, we have discussed how models generalize to new data that is drawn from
the same distribution as the training data. This is a reasonable assumption for experi-
mentation. However, systems deployed in the real world may encounter unexpected data
due to noise, changes in the data statistics over time, or deliberate attacks. Of course,
it is harder to make definite statements about this scenario, but D’Amour et al. (2020)
show that the variability of identical models trained with different seeds on corrupted
data can be enormous and unpredictable.
Goodfellow et al. (2015a) showed that deep learning models are susceptible to adver-
sarial attacks. Consider perturbing an image that is correctly classified by the network Notebook 20.4
as “dog” so that the probability of the correct class decreases as fast as possible un- Adversarial attacks
til the class flips. If this image is now classified as an airplane, you might expect the
perturbed image to look like a cross between a dog and an airplane. However, in prac-
tice, the perturbed image looks almost indistinguishable from the original dog image
(figure 20.14).


===== PDF 428 / книга 414 =====
414 20 Why does deep learning work?
Figure 20.14 Adversarial examples. In
each case, the left image is correctly clas-
sified by AlexNet. By considering the
gradients of the network output with re-
spect to the input, it’s possible to find
a small perturbation (center, magnified
by 10 for visibility) that, when added
to the original image (right), causes the
network to misclassify it as an ostrich.
This is despite the fact that the original
and perturbed images are almost indis-
tinguishable to humans. Adapted from
Szegedy et al. (2014).
The conclusion is that there are positions that are close to but not on the data man-
ifold that are misclassified. These are known as adversarial examples. Their existence
is surprising; how can such a small change to the network input make such a drastic
change to the output? The best current explanation is that adversarial examples aren’t
due to a lack of robustness to data from outside the training data manifold. Instead,
they are exploiting a source of information that is in the training distribution but which
has a small norm and is imperceptible to humans (Ilyas et al., 2019).
20.5 Do we need so many parameters?
Section 20.4 argued that models generalize better when over-parameterized. Indeed,
there are almost no examples of state-of-the-art performance on complex datasets where
the model has significantly fewer parameters than there were training data points.
However, section 20.2 reviewed evidence that training becomes easier as the number
of parameters increases. Hence, it’s not clear if some fundamental property of smaller
models prevents them from performing as well or whether the training algorithms can’t
find good solutions for small models. Pruning and distilling are two methods for reducing
the size of trained models. This section examines whether these methods can produce
underparameterized models which retain the performance of overparameterized ones.
20.5.1 Pruning
Pruning trained models reduces their size and hence storage requirements (figure 20.15).
The simplest approach is to remove individual weights. This can be done based on the
second derivatives of the loss function (LeCun et al., 1990; Hassibi & Stork, 1993) or
(more practically) based on the absolute value of the weight (Han et al., 2016, 2015).
Other work prunes hidden units (Zhou et al., 2016a; Alvarez & Salzmann, 2016), channels
in convolutional networks (Li et al., 2017a; Luo et al., 2017b; He et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2019a), or entire layers in residual nets (Huang & Wang, 2018). Often, the network is


===== PDF 429 / книга 415 =====
20.5 Do we need so many parameters? 415
Figure 20.15 Pruning neural networks. The goal is to remove as many weights
as possible without decreasing performance. This is often done just based on the
magnitude of the weights. Typically, the network is fine-tuned after pruning. a)
Example fully connected network. b) After pruning.
fine-tuned after pruning, and sometimes this process is repeated.
In general, the smaller the model, the large the proportion of weights can be pruned
without significantly damaging performance. For example, Han et al. (2016) maintained
good performance for the VGG network on ImageNet classification when only 8% of the
weights were retained. This significantly decreases the model size but isn’t enough to
show that overparameterization is not required; the VGG network has ∼100 times as
many parameters as there are training data in ImageNet (disregarding augmentation).
Pruning is a form of architecture search. In their work on lottery tickets (see sec-
tion 20.2.7), Frankle & Carbin (2019) (i) trained a network, (ii) pruned the weights with
the smallest magnitudes, and (iii) retrained the remaining network from the same ini-
tial weights. By iterating this procedure, they reduced the size of the VGG-19 network
(originally 138 million parameters) by 98.5% on the CIFAR-10 database (60,000 exam-
ples) while maintaining good performance. For ResNet-50 (25.6 million parameters),
they reduced the parameters by 80% without reducing the performance on ImageNet
(1.28 million examples). These demonstrations are impressive but (disregarding data
augmentation) these networks are still over-parameterized after pruning.
20.5.2 Knowledge distillation
The parameters can also be reduced by training a smaller network (the student) to
replicate the performance of a larger one (the teacher). This is known as knowledge
distillation and dates back to at least Buciluǎ et al. (2006). Hinton et al. (2015) showed
that the pattern of information across the output classes is important and trained a
smaller network to approximate the pre-softmax logits of the larger one (figure 20.16).
Zagoruyko & Komodakis (2017) further encouraged the spatial maps of the activa-
tions of the student network to be similar to the teacher network at various points. They
use this attention transfer method to approximate the performance of a 34-layer residual


===== PDF 430 / книга 416 =====
416 20 Why does deep learning work?
Figure 20.16 Knowledge distillation. a) A teacher network for image classification
is trained as usual, using a multiclass cross-entropy classification loss. b) A smaller
student network is trained with the same loss, plus also a distillation loss that
encourages the pre-softmax activations to be the same as for the teacher.
network (∼63 million parameters) with an 18-layer residual network (∼11 million param-
eters) on the ImageNet classification task. However, this is still larger than the number
of training examples (∼1 million images). Modern methods (e.g. Chen et al., 2021a) can
improve on this result, but distillation has not yet provided convincing evidence that
under-parameterized models can perform well.
20.5.3 Discussion
Current evidence suggests that overparameterization is needed for generalization — at
least for the size and complexity of datasets that are currently used. There are no
demonstrations of state-of-the-art performance on complex datasets where there are sig-
nificantly fewer parameters than training examples. Attempts to reduce model size by
pruning or distilling trained networks have not changed this picture.
Moreover, recent theory shows that there is a trade-off between the model’s Lipschitz
constant and overparameterization; Bubeck & Sellke (2021) proved that in D dimensions,
smooth interpolation requires D times more parameters than mere interpolation. They
argue that current models for large datasets (e.g., ImageNet) aren’t overparameterized
enough; increasing model capacity further may be key to improving performance.


===== PDF 431 / книга 417 =====
20.6 Do networks have to be deep? 417
20.6 Do networks have to be deep?
Chapter 3 discussed the universal approximation theorem. This states that shallow
neural networks can approximate any function to arbitrary accuracy given enough hidden
units. This raises the obvious question of whether networks need to be deep.
First, let’s consider the evidence that depth is required. Historically, there has been
a definite correlation between performance and depth. For example, performance on the
ImageNet benchmark initially improved as a function of network depth until training
became diﬀicult. Subsequently, residual connections and batch normalization (chap-
ter 11) allowed training of deeper networks with commensurate gains in performance.
At the time of writing, almost all state-of-the-art applications, including image classifica-
tion (e.g., the vision transformer), text generation (e.g., GPT3), and text-guided image
synthesis (e.g., DALL·E-2), are based on deep networks with tens or hundreds of layers.
Despite this trend, there have been efforts to use shallower networks. Zagoruyko &
Komodakis (2016) constructed shallower but wider residual neural networks and achieved
similar performance to ResNet. More recently, Goyal et al. (2021) constructed a network
that used parallel convolutional channels and achieved performance similar to deeper net-
works with only 12 layers. Furthermore, Veit et al. (2016) showed that it is predominantly
shorter paths of 5–17 layers that drive performance in residual networks.
Nonetheless, the balance of evidence suggests that depth is critical; even the shallow-
est networks with good image classification performance require >10 layers. However,
there is no definitive explanation for why. Three possible explanations are that (i) deep
networks can represent more complex functions than shallow ones, (ii) deep networks
are easier to train, and (iii) deep networks impose better inductive biases.
20.6.1 Complexity of modeled function
Chapter 4 showed that deep networks make functions with many more linear regions than
shallow ones for the same parameter count. We also saw that “pathological” functions
have been identified that require exponentially more hidden units to model with a shallow
network than a deep one (e.g., Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Telgarsky, 2016). Indeed Liang &
Srikant (2016) found quite general families of functions that are more eﬀiciently modeled
by deep networks. However, Nye & Saxe (2018) found that some of these functions
cannot easily be fit by deep networks in practice. Moreover, there is little evidence that
the real-world functions that we are approximating have these pathological properties.
20.6.2 Tractability of training
An alternative explanation is that shallow networks with a practical number of hidden
units could support state-of-the-art performance, but it is just diﬀicult to find a good
solution that both fits the training data well and interpolates sensibly.
One way to show this is to distill successful deep networks into shallower (but wider)
student models and see if performance can be maintained. Urban et al. (2017) dis-


===== PDF 432 / книга 418 =====
418 20 Why does deep learning work?
tilled an ensemble of 16 convolutional networks for image classification on the CIFAR-10
dataset into student models of varying depths. They found that shallow networks could
not replicate the performance of the deeper teacher and that the student performance
increased as a function of depth for a constant parameter budget.
20.6.3 Inductive bias
Most current models rely on convolutional blocks or transformers. These networks share
parameters for local regions of the input data, and often they gradually integrate this
information across the whole input. These constraints mean that the functions that
these networks can represent are not general. One explanation for the supremacy of
deep networks, then, is that these constraints have a good inductive bias and that it is
diﬀicult to force shallow networks to obey these constraints.
Multi-layer convolutional architectures seem to be inherently helpful, even without
training. Ulyanov et al. (2018) demonstrated that the structure of an untrained CNN
can be used as a prior in low-level tasks such as denoising and super-resolution. Frankle
et al. (2021) achieved good performance in image classification by initializing the kernels
randomly, fixing their values, and just training the batch normalization offset and scaling
factors. Zhang et al. (2017a) show that features from randomly initialized convolutional
filters can support subsequent image classification using a kernel model.
Additional evidence that convolutional networks provide a useful inductive bias comes
from Urban et al. (2017), who attempted to distill convolutional networks into shal-
lower networks. They found that distilling into convolutional architectures systemat-
ically worked better than distilling into fully connected networks. This suggests that
the convolutional architecture has some inherent advantages. Since the sequential local
processing of convolutional networks cannot easily be replicated by shallower networks,
this argues that depth is indeed important.
20.7 Summary
This chapter has made the case that the success of deep learning is surprising. We
discussed the challenges of optimizing high-dimensional loss functions and argued that
overparameterization and the choice of activation function are the two most important
factors that make this tractable in deep networks. We saw that, during training, the
parameters move through a low-dimensional subspace to one of a family of connected
global minima and that local minima are not apparent.
Generalization of neural networks also improves with overparameterization, although
other factors, such as the flatness of the minimum and the inductive bias of the architec-
ture, are also important. It appears that both a large number of parameters and multiple
network layers are required for good generalization, although we do not yet know why.
Many questions remain unanswered. We do not currently have any prescriptive theory
that will allow us to predict the circumstances in which training and generalization will


===== PDF 433 / книга 419 =====
20.7 Summary 419
succeed or fail. We do not know the limits of learning in deep networks or whether
much more eﬀicient models are possible. We do not know if there are parameters that
would generalize better within the same model. The study of deep learning is still driven
by empirical demonstrations. These are undeniably impressive, but they are not yet
matched by our understanding of deep learning mechanisms.
Problems
Problem 20.1 Consider the ImageNet image classification task in which the input images contain
224×224×3 RGB values. Consider coarsely quantizing these inputs into ten bins per RGB value
and training with ∼ 107 training examples. How many possible inputs are there per training
data point?
Problem 20.2 Consider figure 20.1. Why do you think that the algorithm fits the data faster
when the pixels are randomized relative to when the labels are randomized?
Problem 20.3 Figure 20.2 shows a non-stochastic fitting process with a fixed learning rate
successfully fitting random data. Does this imply that the loss function has no local minima?
Does this imply that the function is convex? Justify your answer and give a counter-example if
you think either statement is false.
